
<<<PAGE 1>>>
 
 
 
 
Energies 2022, 15, 8033. https://doi.org/10.3390/en15218033 
www.mdpi.com/journal/energies 
Review 
The Impact of Soiling on PV Module Performance 
in Saudi Arabia 
Hassan Z. Al Garni 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Jubail Industrial College, Al Jubail 31961, Saudi Arabia; 
garnihz@gmail.com or garnih@rcjy.edu.sa; Tel.: +966-543331315 
Abstract: Solar photovoltaic (PV) deployment is rapidly expanding around the world. However, 
the soiling factor has an impact on its performance. Saudi Arabia has high solar irradiation and 
plans to diversify its energy mix for electricity generation by deploying more solar PV across the 
country. However, it is located in an arid and desert environment, making it a challenging project 
due to dust accumulation on solar modules. The soiling and PV performance in Saudi Arabia are 
examined in this paper. Furthermore, it highlights several mitigation techniques that can be used to 
maintain PV performance through preventive and restorative measures. Furthermore, this study 
looks into the size and characterization of dust in Saudi Arabia, as well as the entire life cycle of dust 
accumulation on PV modules. In this review study, the performance of solar PV systems is evalu-
ated under soiling in different regions of Saudi Arabia. Depending on the local environment and 
other factors, the PV performance has been reduced by somewhere between 2% and 50%. A single 
sandstorm reduced the module power output by 20%. As revealed in Dhahran, the PV module was 
exposed to an outdoor environment and not cleaned for 6 months resulting in a power drop of more 
than 50%. It is strongly advised to clean PV panels once a month or fewer to maintain a high-per-
formance system. However, in the event of a dust storm, it is advised to clean the system immedi-
ately to avoid a major decline in PV performance. The bi-facial PV solar panels technology associ-
ated with solar trackers and utilizing robotic cleaning systems have maximized the received solar 
irradiation and minimized the soiling loss efficiently. The most common elements found in dust 
particles are primarily derived from the natural desert. It has been noted that the composition and 
sizes of dust particles depend heavily on the location of the PV module. It is concluded that dust 
accumulation and cleaning costs are not a significant barrier to large-scale, cost-effective solar PV 
deployments in Saudi Arabia, particularly in the central region, which is considered a high-suitable 
region for utility-size PV plants due to many factors. The results of this study are essential for en-
lightening the PV engineering community, investors, and the research community about how soil-
ing may affect regions with significant solar potential, such as Saudi Arabia, and what potential 
soiling mitigation strategies may be considered to maintain high-performance solar PV projects. 
Keywords: soiling; losses; dust characteristics; dust size; Saudi Arabia; PV performance; mitigation 
techniques; robotic cleaning; tracking system; Bi-facial PV 
 
1. Introduction 
Solar photovoltaic (PV) is growing at an extraordinary rate which brought the global 
total to approximately 942 GW, including both on-grid and off-grid capacity by the end 
of 2021 [1]. Solar PV growth continues to break records, with annual additions reaching 
162 GW by 2022 as shown in Figure 1 [2]. 
Citation: Al Garni, H.Z. The Impact 
of Soiling on PV Module 
Performance in Saudi Arabia. 
Energies 2022, 15, 8033. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/en15218033 
Academic Editor: Carlo Renno 
Received: 2 October 2022 
Accepted: 21 October 2022 
Published: 28 October 2022 
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neu-
tral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institu-
tional affiliations. 
 
Copyright: © 2022 by the author. Li-
censee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. 
This article is an open access article 
distributed under the terms and con-
ditions of the Creative Commons At-
tribution (CC BY) license (https://cre-
ativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 

<<<PAGE 2>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
2 of 26 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Annual solar PV capacity additions by application segment, 2015–2022 Source: IEA, An-
nual 
solar 
PV 
capacity 
additions 
by 
application 
segment, 
2015–2022, 
IEA, 
Paris 
https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/charts/annual-solar-pv-capacity-additions-by-application-
segment-2015-2022, (accessed on 1 October 2022). IEA. License: CC BY 4.0 [2]. 
Saudi Arabia is an oil-dependent country and relies entirely on fossil fuels to generate 
electricity. Thus, as a part of Saudi Arabia’s 2030 vision, the country is targeting to diver-
sify the energy mix used in electricity generation and increase the share of renewable en-
ergy and natural gas to around 50% each by 2030 [3]. 
The motivation for this research is that Saudi Arabia plans to develop several solar 
PV projects to supply its existing energy portfolio with clean energy sources, primarily 
from solar PV. The deployment of solar PV across the country is associated with many 
challenges including the soiling impact. Several grid-connected solar PV farms have been 
developed or are under planning and development stages. For example, with an installed 
capacity of 1.5 GW, a grid-connected PV power plant in Sudair, Saudi Arabia’s central 
area, is considered to be one of the biggest solar PV facilities in the world and the largest 
of its kind in the country [4]. Around 185,000 households will be powered by it, and it will 
decrease 2.9 million tons of emissions annually. In 2019, a 300 MW solar PV project devel-
oped in Sakaka was connected to the grid as Saudi Arabia’s initial project utilizing renew-
able energy [5]. 91 MW solar farm is under construction in Layla, Riyadh province which 
is expected to be fully operational by 2024 [6]. Known as Faisaliah Solar Power Project, a 
giant PV plant of 2,600 MW installed capacity is proposed for the Makkah region and is 
being developed by the Saudi Ministry of Energy in phases [7]. Figure 2 highlights the 
status of solar PV projects in Saudi Arabia, including operational, under construction, and 
planned solar PV projects with their power capacities [4,5,7–9]. 

<<<PAGE 3>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
3 of 26 
 
 
 
Figure 2. The current status of Saudi Arabia’s solar PV projects, along with their respective power 
capacities. 
The intermittent nature of solar radiation complicates energy management, particu-
larly in maintaining the production/consumption balance within an electrical grid [10,11]. 
Moreover, the output power of solar PV is influenced by various internal and external 
factors including the amount of solar irradiation [11–15], the type of PV technology [14,16–
18] tilt angle [13,14,19,20], shading [21–24], ambient and module temperature [24–30] and 
dust accumulation [14,31–38]. 
In the case of Saudi Arabia, which is located in an arid and desert environment solar 
PV farms become very challenging projects due to dust accumulation on solar modules. 
Figure 3 illustrates the global distribution of ambient air pollution which can be greatly 
influenced by sand storms mostly in areas nearby deserts where PM2.5 refers to fine par-
ticulate matter with a diameter of 2.5 microns or less [39]. 
 
Figure 3. Modeled annual median PM2.5 concentrations, as shown on a map of the world, in µg/m3 
Reprinted from WHO, Ambient Air Pollution: A Global Assessment of Exposure and Burden of Dis-
ease, WHO, Exposure to ambient air pollution, 33, Copyright (2022) with permission from WHO [39]. 
The objective of this study is to review the soiling and PV performance in Saudi Ara-
bia. It highlights the soiling challenges in utility-scale PV projects, current solutions, and 
future perspectives in Saudi Arabia. The findings of this study are crucial for informing 

<<<PAGE 4>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
4 of 26 
 
 
the research community, investors, and PV engineers on how soiling may influence coun-
tries with great solar potential, such as Saudi Arabia, and what potential soiling mitigation 
strategies might be taken into consideration. 
• 
The following are the primary contributions of this research study: it offers a critical 
review of the soiling impact on solar PV performance in arid and high solar irradia-
tion regions such as Saudi Arabia for the first time. 
• 
The results and recommendations concluded from this study are essential for enlight-
ening the PV engineering community, investors, and the research community about 
how soiling may affect regions with significant solar potential, such as Saudi Arabia. 
• 
It describes in detail various soiling mitigation techniques and highlights the benefits 
and drawbacks of each technique, as well as which one is best suited for maintaining 
high-performance solar PV projects in such a hot and arid country. Current solar PV 
projects in Saudi Arabia that have recently been implemented have been considered 
and discussed. 
• 
This study will encourage researchers to focus more on the need for energy diversi-
fication and to broaden research on the effect of dust on PV modules in developing 
countries like Saudi Arabia, which has a high potential for solar energy deployment 
but has got limited research on these topics to date. 
The structure of this research study is as follows: The life cycle of dust deposition on 
solar panels is described in Section 2. Section 3 presents a detailed review of the soiling 
impact on solar PV in Saudi Arabia. It deals with soiling sources and the PV performance 
under soiling besides the dust particle size and composition in Saudi Arabia. In Section 4, 
several mitigation techniques along with their advantages and disadvantages are re-
ported. Then, Section 5 discusses and investigates the implications of the research based 
on the findings. Finally, Section 6 draws meaningful conclusions from this study. 
2. Dust Formation Life Cycle on PV 
The definitions of dust vary depending on how the study is applied in the literature. 
In this study, dust is referred to as solid inorganic particles that are produced as a result 
of rock weathering. The dust particle size has a diameter smaller than 500 µm. Figure 4 
depicts the entire soiling process initiated by dust generation, including dust particle 
transportation and dust deposition on PV panels, where some particles adhere and others 
rebound or are removed and resuspended. 
In general, dust particles are generated from desert storms, industrial emissions, ve-
hicle exhaustion, construction sites, volcano eruption, pollen, air pollution, plant material, 
and other anthropogenic sources [40]. 

<<<PAGE 5>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
5 of 26 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Dust accumulation life cycle and interrelated factors. 
Global dust originated from different regions in the world which is mainly from de-
sert zones. Some of the major source regions are Arabian, and Saharan parts of North 
Africa, Peninsula Eastern and Western China, Central Asia, South America, and Australia. 
The atmospheric dust concentration of the Middle east is mainly from desert dust. 
The phase of dust deposition on a PV surface depends on the particle matter and 
wind speed. Based on the transport mechanism, the deposition of particles can be catego-
rized into three groups dry, wet, and shadow [41]. The dry mechanism took place when 
airborne particles migrated to the ground surface, whether on people, vegetation, animals, 
or other objects. Dry refers to the process, not the characteristics of the surface, that con-
trols the transfer of particles to the surface. Wet deposition is the interaction of particles 
with atmospheric water. Shadow deposition is an intermediate mechanism between dry 
and wet which has been attributed to cloud or fog droplets [41]. 
Soiling is a major issue that can degrade the PV performance. In addition, there are 
many factors influencing dust settlement on PV modules including: site characteristic, 
dust properties, wind, temperature, humidity, tilt angle, surface orientation and PV sur-
face property. 
Electrostatic, van der Waals, and capillary forces all contribute to the adherence of 
dust to a PV surface. Electrostatic force results in an adhesive force when the particles are 
moist and close to one another. In the atmosphere, the dust particle hits each other and 
generates an electric charge that results in the accumulation of more dust on the PV panels 
[42,43]. 
Minor dry dust particles adhere over a dry PV surface due to the van der Waals force, 
which is considered the main force between a solid surface and a dry particle. In the dust, 
the soluble matter dissolves in the condensation droplets then during the daytime they 
will dry again and leaves a solid material bond between dust particles and the PV panel 

<<<PAGE 6>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
6 of 26 
 
 
surface that could be hard to remove. Even in the absence of the cementation mechanism, 
the surface condensation causes capillary adhesion [44–47]. The adhesion forces (capillary, 
van der Waals, electrostatic, and gravitational) all exist almost everywhere, but the 
strength of their adhesion depends on the climate and the physical and chemical charac-
teristics of the dust particles. 
3. Soiling Impact on Solar PV in Saudi Arabia 
Saudi Arabia, which occupies the majority of the Arabian Peninsula and spans an 
area of around 2 million km2, is situated in southeast Asia. Rahman et al. [48] studied the 
duration of sunshine and the yearly global horizontal irradiance (GHI) over 41 cities in 
Saudi Arabia. Results indicated that the yearly sunshine duration is 3248 h, while the GHI 
varies between 1.63 MWh/m2/year (at Tabuk, a northwestern region) and 2.56 MWh/m2/year 
(at Bisha, a southwestern region). Figure 5 shows the annual average of GHI for the long 
term obtained from the SolarGIS database [49]. The minimum yearly GHI is above the av-
erage GHI in several leading counties in solar PV. Additionally, the GHI and sunshine pat-
terns follow the trend of energy demand. The most advantageous renewable energy source 
for Saudi Arabia is solar energy, particularly during the summer when electricity demand 
is at its highest and is mostly driven by air conditioning systems [12,50]. 
 
Figure 5. The annual average of global horizontal irradiance. Reprinted from Solar resource maps 
of Saudi Arabia, The World Bank, Source: Global Solar Atlas 2.0, Solar resource data: Solargis, 
Copyright (2022), (CC BY 4.0)[49]. 
 
 

<<<PAGE 7>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
7 of 26 
 
 
3.1. Soiling Generation Sources 
Saudi Arabia is located in the Arabian Peninsula which is recognized as one of the 
major sources of dust generation worldwide [51–53]. Due to Saudi Arabia’s location, 
which falls inside the desert and arid areas whose precipitation rate does not surpass 50 
mm, the country’s atmosphere is mostly impacted by desert dust. The sandy regions in 
Saudi Arabia are represented by the Empty Quarter (Rub’ Al Khali), Al-Dahna, and Al-
Nofuth deserts, which spread in most provinces and cover more than 30% of the country 
[54,55]. The Empty Quarter, the largest desert on the Arabian Peninsula and one of the 
largest sand deserts in the world, dominates most of southern and southeast Saudi Arabia. 
It is regarded as the main local source of dust. 
Other primary remote sources of dust in the country are the Iraqi Desert, for the 
northern and eastern parts, and the Saharan Desert, for the western region of Saudi Ara-
bia. Furthermore, the sources of dust in the country are the eastern regions of Yemen, the 
eastern part of Syria, and the plateau of eastern Jordan [52,56]. Due to the poor vegetation 
cover, loosened soil, and lack of wind cohesiveness, sandstorms have increased. Regard-
ing the seasons, the major spread of dust storms is observed during the spring [54,56] and 
summer seasons [52,55]. 
With 30 years of data, Labban and Butt [55] studied the relationship between dust 
storms and meteorological parameters in Saudi Arabia. Results showed that sand and 
dust storm events have the lowest correlation with precipitation and the highest correla-
tion with wind speed and temperature. Ground station Qaisumah (318 events) and Ahsa 
(313 events), both in eastern Saudi Arabia, reported the largest number of sand storms per 
year. In contrast, the lowest number of annual sand storms (10 events) occurred in Alwejh 
and Alkhamis located in the western and southern regions, respectively, followed by Taif 
(12 events) located on the western side of Saudi Arabia. According to the seasonal analy-
sis, Qaisumah (198 events) recorded the spring storm peak while Al Ahsa, which lies in 
the east, reported the summer (90 events) and winter (60 events) storm peaks. On the other 
side, the ground station in Gizan (51), which is situated South of Saudi Arabia, reports the 
autumn peak. 
3.2. Solar PV Performance under Soiling in Saudi Arabia 
The performance of solar PV may be affected by two factors in soiling circumstances. 
The first factor is the dust particle’s size. Second, the accumulation of dust on the solar PV 
surface, which affects the optical property [57]. In the atmosphere, if the dust particle is 
greater than the solar irradiation wavelength then the radiation will scatter and will lead 
to solar irradiation reduction. Therefore, dust particles will create a layer that can cause 
solar irradiation to be absorbed or reflected. As a result, the module’s performance will 
decline due to a drop in transmittance. 
Several studies in the literature have examined the impact of soiling on solar PV per-
formance in several countries with high solar irradiation and soiling exposure, including 
Morocco, India, Oman, Pakistan, Nigeria, and the United States. 
In [33], the authors provide a comprehensive, detailed description and elaboration of 
the evolution of soiling research in the solar energy field from 1942 to 2019. In [34], the 
authors represent an updated survey on the effect of soiling on PV performance, as well 
as a summary of the key contributions of this phenomenon in both Morocco and India, 
and concluded that soiling can dramatically reduce the amount of solar energy received 
by the panel. The authors in [35] have studied and investigated the soiling effect on solar 
PV performance in six cities in Oman for one year. The reduction in PV output efficiencies 
for the studied cities reached from 5.5% to 18%. In Lahore, Pakistan, the authors in [36] 
observed that the soiling rate was around 0.8% per day for a 30° tilted panel which is 
among the highest soiling rates reported for various urban locations throughout South 
Asia and the Gulf region. Another more recent study examined the effects of soiling in 
Nigeria [37], the authors investigated the effects of dust on four different PV technologies 

<<<PAGE 8>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
8 of 26 
 
 
(Monocrystalline Silicon, Polycrystalline Silicon, Cadmium Telluride, and amorphous Sil-
icon). The findings reveal significant losses, with a yield loss of 78.3% and efficiencies de-
clining by 78% for amorphous Si, 77% and 77% for cadmium telluride, 70% and 71% for 
polycrystalline, and 68.6% and 71% for monocrystalline Si. 
The authors in [38] studied the soiling losses for solar photovoltaic systems in Cali-
fornia, USA. Overall, soiling losses averaged 0.051% per day, with 26% of the sites expe-
riencing losses greater than 0.1% per day. Soiling losses were greater at sites with small 
tilt angles (<5°). 
In reference [58] a PV panel’s performance was evaluated after several months of 
outdoor exposure in Dhahran, KSA. They discovered that the PV panel’s efficiency de-
graded on average by 7% per month. 
The authors in [28] report a power loss of about 11.5% in a PV module after only 72 
h of outdoor exposure in Riyadh’s central region. A study by Salim et al. [29] examined 
the long-term soiling effect on a PV system near Riyadh and found that after 8 months of 
soiling, the solar modules’ performance had decreased by 32%. 
In Thuwal, western region, the authors in [44] examined the effect of the soiling on 
solar PV for outdoor exposure for a week. Due to the dust accumulation on the first day, 
they found that the transmittance reduction was 2%. They claim that the dust adhesion 
was high the first time due to the surface electrostatic force. Figure 6 shows the transmit-
tance of the samples which decreases over time as a result of the continuous dust accu-
mulation in a week of exposure (the x-axis denotes the wavelength in nm and the y-axis 
denotes the glass transmittance in percentage). 
 
Figure 6. Soiling and its consequence on transmittance over one week of exposure. Reprinted from 
Solar Energy, 135, Al Shehri A et al., Impact of dust deposition and brush-based dry cleaning on 
glass transmittance for PV modules applications, 320., Copyright (2016), with permission from 
Elsevier [44]. 
In [30], Said and Walwil investigated how dust accumulation affected the glass cover 
of PV modules in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. After 45 days of outdoor exposure, the results 
exhibited that the dust deposition was 5 g/m2, the transmittance reduction was 35% and 
the total transmittance reduction was 20%. Consequently, the power reduction was about 

<<<PAGE 9>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
9 of 26 
 
 
6% in 5 weeks of exposure. The PV power output of the dusty modules concerning expo-
sure time is shown in Figure 7. The result is determined by dividing the weekly average 
daily peak power output of clean modules by the weekly average daily peak power out-
put of dusty modules, and it represents the normalized weekly average daily peak power 
output of dusty modules. 
 
Figure 7. Normalized weekly maximum power output of dusty modules. Reprinted from Solar 
Energy, 107, Said, Syed A.M. et al., Fundamental studies on dust fouling effects on PV module 
performance, 331., Copyright (2014), with permission from Elsevier[59]. 
Figure 8 shows that, on average, the short circuit current has decreased by 13% after 
5 weeks of exposure to the outdoors. For different exposure periods, the tilt angles of the 
PV modules are investigated. It has been observed that the likelihood of removing some 
dust particles would be increased by the high tilt angle. Figure 9 shows that increasing the 
inclination angle decreases the amount of accumulated dust on the glass and improves 
the glass transmittance. 
 
Figure 8. At noon, the I-V curves of the dusty and clean modules. Reprinted from Solar Energy, 
107, Said, Syed A.M. et al., Fundamental studies on dust fouling effects on PV module perfor-
mance, 332., Copyright (2014), with permission from Elsevier [59]. 

<<<PAGE 10>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
10 of 26 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Dust deposition with tilt angle for various exposure periods. Reprinted from Solar En-
ergy, 107, Said, Syed A.M. et al., Fundamental studies on dust fouling effects on PV module per-
formance, 333., Copyright (2014), with permission from Elsevier [59]. 
Moreover, the authors have tested and compared the anti-reflective coated glass with 
no coated plain glass and found that the coated glass showed less reduction in transmit-
tance due to the roughness of the surface. 
In Rumah, near Riyadh city, the authors in [60], investigated the soiling impact on 
power loss for different solar PV technologies. The panels are oriented at a tilt angle of 15° 
concerning the zenith and are mounted 16° due south. The soiling loss rates of all the 
technologies examined over a 30-day period ranged from 2% to 18%. Figure 10 depicts the 
soiling losses of the different PV technologies. Concerning the rate of dust accumulation, 
there is a strong seasonal pattern with losses of around 16% in April (dustiest) versus only 
around 2% in July (least dusty). The soil weight on glass samples for each month has been 
investigated under two positions: tilted to 15° and horizontal orientations. Figure 11 
shows the soil weight for each month under the two orientations as a function of the weeks 
of exposure. In summary, the accumulated soil weight correlates well with the dust accu-
mulation loss which has been modeled by the following simple exponential: 
𝐿𝑠(𝑡) = 1 −𝑒−𝑎𝑡 
The coefficients are the value of a that best fits measured data by reducing the square 
of the difference between the modeled and measured values for the month and technology 
type. The properties of the model are: 
𝐿𝑠(0) = 0 and 𝐿𝑠→ 1 as t →∞ 

<<<PAGE 11>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
11 of 26 
 
 
 
Figure 10. The Soiling loss of different PV technologies after 30-day exposure shows a strong sea-
sonal dependence [60]. 
 
Figure 11. Monthly dust accumulation weight on horizontal and tilted glass (tilt angle of 15°) [60]. 
Adinoyi and Syed, in [31], studied the performance of six modules outdoors in Dhah-
ran, the eastern part of Saudi Arabia. The modules were tilted at Dhahran latitude of 26° 
and faced south. They have noticed that there is dust suspended in the atmosphere which 
can scatter the solar irradiation in addition to the dust accumulated on solar PV modules. 
The maximum power was recorded around noontime on a cloudless day, with a radiation 
intensity of 800 W/m2 or greater. Figure 12 demonstrates the power decreasing continu-
ously due to soiling. In March, a single sandstorm reduced the module power output of 
solar PV modules by 20% whereas in November, due to rainfall the power output for all 
the modules increased to their highest values. Though from December to March a weekly 
cleaning routine has been applied to all modules, therefore the power outputs of the mod-
ules remained high. The power outputs started to decrease again as there was no further 

<<<PAGE 12>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
12 of 26 
 
 
cleaning from April. They concluded that if the PV module is exposed to outdoor condi-
tions and not cleaned for 6 months, the power output will experience a drop of more than 
50%. They also noticed that the decrease in power output is relying on the frequency and 
density of the dust not only on the duration of the exposure. 
 
Figure 12. Daily peak power output (monthly averaged). Reprinted from Renewable Energy, 60, 
Adinoyi M. et al., Effect of dust accumulation on the power outputs of solar photovoltaic modules, 
634., Copyright (2013), with permission from Elsevier[31]. 
As illustrated in Figure 13, the solar tracker has improved the PV module perfor-
mance by halving the dust effect. At noon time PV module delivers its maximum power. 
The maximum differences between the output of the two modules occur at sunrise and 
sunset times. 
 
Figure 13. The hourly power output of the solar tracker versus fixed stand. Reprinted from Re-
newable Energy, 60, Adinoyi M. et al., Effect of dust accumulation on the power outputs of solar 
photovoltaic modules, 635., Copyright (2013), with permission from Elsevier [31]. 

<<<PAGE 13>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
13 of 26 
 
 
Through field exposure of solar modules in Arar, north of Saudi Arabia, the author 
in [61] has reported a decrease in both the short circuit current and the open circuit voltage 
by 2.78% and 0.863% per day respectively due to dust deposition. Furthermore, a strong 
correlation is observed between the tilt angle and dust accumulation on the glass cover of 
a PV module. 
In Madinah city, western Saudi Arabia the researcher in [62] has investigated the im-
pact of dust on IV characteristics and the efficiency of solar PV. The output power loss 
reached 28% if dust accumulated up to 60 days of outdoor exposure. They have concluded 
that even though rainfall has partially cleaned the module and minimized dust accumu-
lation, it cannot be counted on it for cleaning the modules since the rainfall is occasional 
at Madinah during the year. 
A recent study In [63], investigated the performance of clean and dusty solar PV in-
stalled in Rabigh, the eastern part of Saudi Arabia. It has observed a significant drop in 
solar PV performance when the thickness of dust accumulation is increased. It is con-
cluded that a cleaning system must be considered for PV panels in Rabigh to maintain a 
high-performance solar PV system. 
3.3. Dust Particles Size and Composition 
According to several studies, the size and composition of dust vary from site to site 
around the world. This can have an impact on dust accumulation and PV module perfor-
mance [58,64–66]. In rural locations, plants and vegetation as well as wind-blown dust 
compounds are the main sources of dust particles, whereas, in urban areas, construction 
sites and vehicle exhaust are the major sources. 
Most of the dust studied from PV modules in Saudi Arabia’s neighboring countries, 
including Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, and Kuwait is caused by wind-blown dust 
containing calcite, dolomite, quartz, and feldspar. Moreover, since these countries border 
the sea, sea salts can be found [46,67]. 
Because dust particle size and composition vary depending on location, a thorough 
investigation of the soiling mechanism using analytical tools such as XRD, XPS, and scan-
ning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis is required to find more suitable cleaning solu-
tions for PV modules. Several studies have found that the particle composition can vary 
even within the same location [46,59,66]. 
Said and Walwil, in [59], investigated various dust particles collected from solar PV 
surfaces in Dhahran city. The highest concentration was discovered to be oxygen, fol-
lowed by silicon, calcium, iron, and sulfur. Calcite and quartz compounds account for 
more than 60% of dust particle content. In general, the study found that dust particles 
have a spherical shape. They discovered that the majority of the particles have a size of 
less than 2 μm and can scatter solar irradiation. 
Mehmood et al. [66] investigated the characteristics of dust that accumulated on PV 
modules in the same location. They discovered that the dust particles were not evenly 
distributed. It also has a small amount of Na and a large amount of Ca. Si, C, Fe, and Mg 
are the other elements. It has been discovered that there is no standard size for dust par-
ticles. Figure 14 below depicts the size distribution of the dust sample. 

<<<PAGE 14>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
14 of 26 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Size distribution of the dust sample. Reprinted from Solar Energy, 141, Mehmood U. et 
al., Characterization of dust collected from PV modules in the area of Dhahran, Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia, and its impact on protective transparent covers for photovoltaic applications, 205., Copy-
right (2017), with permission from Elsevier [66]. 
SEM morphological analysis of the dust sample reveals that the tiny dust particles 
accumulated in clusters of about 1–2 μm (Figure 15a). Due to the opposite charges' exist-
ence, Figure 15b shows that small particles are joined to large particles. Moreover, Figure 
15c shows that flake-like particles which are rich in Ca and Si are also presented in the 
dust sample. 
 
Figure 15. SEM images of dust samples: (a) dust sizes (b) Adhesion to large particles, and (c) Flake-
like particles. Reprinted from Solar Energy, 141, Mehmood U. et al., Characterization of dust col-
lected from PV modules in the area of Dhahran, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and its impact on pro-
tective transparent covers for photovoltaic applications, 205., Copyright (2017), with permission 
from Elsevier [66]. 

<<<PAGE 15>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
15 of 26 
 
 
In addition, Adinoyi and Said [31] presented a study on the impact of soiling on solar 
PV performance in Dhahran city. They studied the performance of six modules exposed 
to the outdoor condition. The SEM revealed that the dust has irregular particle sizes. Us-
ing Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS), the results show that O2 makes up the major-
ity of the dust composition (an average of 58%), followed by calcium, carbon, and Sulphur. 
Similarly, [45] investigated the dust accumulated on the surface of the protective 
glass of PV modules in Dammam, Saudi Arabia, which was collected every two weeks. 
The SEM images of the soiling on a PV protective glass test surface were studied. The 
average particle size was 1.2 μm. The little dust particles become adhered to the giant 
particles as a result of the forces created by charges acting on the various materials. The 
morphologies of the dust particles varied, and some had flake-like structures, while others 
had sharp edges and round corners. In general, Si, Ca, Mg, Na, K, S, O, and Fe were the 
most common elements detected in dust particles regardless of size. 
It can be concluded that the most common elements are oxygen, calcium, silicon, 
magnesium, and iron, while the dominant components are quartz, calcite, and dolomite, 
which are primarily derived from natural desert particles. It should be noted that the com-
position and sizes of dust particles depend on the location of the PV module. 
4. Mitigation Strategies 
Several mitigation techniques have been discussed in literature aiming to mitigate 
the challenge of PV soiling [44,46,68–74]. The cleaning techniques including manual, nat-
ural, automated, and self-cleaning are illustrated in Figure 16. 
 
Figure 16. Dust mitigation techniques [69]. 
4.1. Manual Cleaning 
In this case, the solar PV will be scrubbed and washed using rags and brushes to 
restore cleanliness as shown in Figure 17. This approach is effective in removing the hard 
soiling and cementations. However, it may cause an abrasive effect on solar modules due 
to the direct brushing method. Moreover, this technique is considered an expensive 
method mainly due to intensive labor requirements and a large amount of water necessity 
Mitigation 
Techniques
Manual cleaning
Natural cleaning
Rainfall
Wind
Gravity
Automated 
cleaning
Water
Mechanized
Self cleaning
Super 
hydrophobic 
Plane
Super 
hydrophilic 
plane
Electrodynamic 
screen

<<<PAGE 16>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
16 of 26 
 
 
[69,71,74,75]. This technique is only suitable for low-scale PV plants and will be very tedi-
ous and challenging for workers due to the PV sensitivity and the height where the mod-
ule is installed [76]. 
 
Figure 17. Manual cleaning [76]. 
4.2. Natural Cleaning 
Natural phenomena, including wind, rainfall, and gravity, have an impact on remov-
ing the dust from solar PV modules. Rainfall is an effective natural cleaning process that 
can recover the performance of solar PV modules. The droplets that stay on the PV module 
can cause adhesiveness on the module. The light rainfall tends to collect flying dust par-
ticles and accumulate on the surface which leads to a decrease in the efficiency of the PV 
system. In arid areas, this phenomenon is not regular and cannot be relied on [69],[75]. 
Wind eliminates the dust particles from the PV module surface. Some factors play a 
role such as the speed of the wind, direction of the wind, and module tilt angle. The wind 
is a natural phenomenon like rainfall and being dependent on it for cleaning the modules 
is not a good option especially when it is a low-speed wind since it will accumulate dust 
on the PV surface and then deteriorate the system performance [77],[42]. 
4.3. Automated Cleaning 
4.3.1. Water-Based Cleaning 
It is the most commonly used method of mitigating dust from solar PV surfaces 
[35,40]. Highly pressurized water (with detergent sometimes) is used to clean the surface 
and can efficiently remove dust accumulation. However, water scarcity is an issue, espe-
cially in arid and semiarid areas where solar irradiation is high. Moreover, for the hot PV 
panels using water for cleaning could cause a thermal shock due to the water being cooler 
than the PV surface. Moreover, when the PV panel surface is wet after cleaning, it may 
attract more dust particles. Such drawbacks could be avoided by regulating the timing of 
cleaning [41]. 
4.3.2. Mechanized Cleaning 
A variety of mechanical automated cleaning methods which include mechanical wip-
ing, robotic cleaning, drone brushing, blowing, and vibrating are utilized to clean the PV 
module surface. These techniques minimize labor intensity and utilize automation sys-
tems. At large-scale solar plants, robotic cleaning devices can move on their own to clean 
solar panels, as illustrated in Figure 18 [44]. 

<<<PAGE 17>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
17 of 26 
 
 
 
Figure 18. Solar cleaning robot [78]. 
A quick, efficient, and water-saving cleaning solution for PV modules in solar power 
plants is a tractor-mounted hydraulic arm as shown in Figure 19. It is made to be simple 
and operated by a single person. Additionally, it is designed to be compact and portable 
so that it may fit in places other cleaning equipment cannot and operate well in tight sites. 
Moreover, it is easy to maneuver, park, and operate [45]. 
 
Figure 19. Tractor-mounted hydraulic arm [79]. 
Drones are an emerging technology in the solar PV sector due to their long-range 
monitoring, efficient data logging, inspection reliability, and ease to control and access. It 
is considered an alternative to fixed robotic and manual cleaning approaches. Recently, 
drones have been utilized in monitoring, inspection, and cleaning of solar PV panels as 
presented in recent research [80–82] A recent study [82] examines the efficiency of several 
PV cleaning techniques for potential retrofitting into drones. The authors found that brush 
and microfiber based-cloth wipers are the best-suited options for drone-based solar PV 
cleaning due to their low weight, small size, and ease of use. Several commercial drones 
are available for cleaning utility-scale solar PV farms. For example, Cleardron uses sensor 
fusion, computer vision, and artificial intelligence to detect and clean PV panels [83]. It 

<<<PAGE 18>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
18 of 26 
 
 
contains a glass cleaning device and a detachable container with cleaning fluid. Hercules 
10 Spray drone [84] developed by Drone Volt equipped with a spray system and powerful 
pump which spray up to 3 L per minute as shown in Figure 20. Furthermore, Aerial Power 
which makes use of a drone’s downward airflow to clean the PV panel is a fast and wa-
terless cleaning method [85]. The key shortcomings of drones include the short flight pe-
riod and the required recharging time which could be overcome by customizing the 
power source and optimizing the cleaning cycles. Using a drone for PV cleaning has var-
ious advantages including its autonomy, and mobility, and is utilized on-need basis, 
hence eliminating high-cost fixed installations as in robotic cleaning techniques. Addition-
ally, based on the cleaning approach utilized, drones can also offer a water-free cleaning 
method [82]. Cleaning solar panels with drones is currently in the research and develop-
ment stages. 
 
Figure 20. Solar panels cleaning using a spray drone [84]. 
The piezoelectric technique is used in the vibration technology to provide vibration 
that cleans the module surface. With this method, the power efficiency of PV modules can 
be restored to about 95% [73,86]. A programmable logical controller (PLC) and microcon-
troller are used to run the wiper and brushes to clean the module. Similarly, the robotic 
cleaning technique uses automation for module cleaning. 
The drawbacks of these techniques include electrical energy requirements and the 
high initial cost of such automatic systems. Additionally, the mechanized systems re-
quired regular maintenance. The cleaning efficiency of the technologies is uncertain and 
may prove to be not quite efficient in the case of high soiling case [75]. 
4.4. Automated Cleaning 
4.4.1. Super-Hydrophobic Plane (SHOP) 
This technique uses a chemical coating or screen layer that repulses dust particles 
back into the air. It helps water-shedding without the energy needed as shown in Figure 
21 [87]. SHOP has a low wettability, which makes it less likely for liquid droplets to adhere 
to the surface. This helps to remove dust particles when it rains, enhancing efficiency and 
improving cleanliness. SHOP is working more efficiently with rainfall to make this clean-
ing effective [75]. The lifespan of this technology is limited and when subjected to a lot of 
ultraviolet (UV) radiation, it may crack. The efficiency of using SHOP is still unconfirmed, 
especially under various atmospheric conditions [69,71,75]. 

<<<PAGE 19>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
19 of 26 
 
 
 
Figure 21. Super Hydrophobic Coating on PV panel [87]. 
4.4.2. Super Hydrophilic Plane (SHIP) 
Hydrophilicity can be expressed as contrary characteristics of hydrophobicity. SHIP 
is a preventive approach that has a strong pull on the water while SHOP resists water [88]. 
The hydrophilic state of a module, represented by the contact between the liquid and 
solid, can be achieved through the development of the module's roughness. Hydrophilic 
surfaces are created using titanium oxide nanofilm and glass surface fabrication via nano-
patterning. Water droplets on the hydrophilic surface are flattened and widely spread 
across the surface, whereas water droplets on the hydrophobic surface do not spread and 
are mostly sphere shaped on the surface [71]. The difference in contact angles between the 
droplet and the surface for both hydrophilic and hydrophobic is shown in Figure 22. 
 
Figure 22. Contact angle for hydrophilic and hydrophobic planes. Source: IOP Conference Series: 
Materials Science and Engineering, Preliminary Tests for Ti-Mo-Zr-Ta Alloys as Potential Bio-
materials, IPO, DOI: 10.1088/1757-899X/374/1/012023, IPO. License: CC BY 3.0 [89]. 
The water droplet on the hydrophilic surface spreads and goes beneath the dust par-
ticle, carrying it away, whereas the spherical droplet on the hydrophobic surface rolls and 
picks up the dust particle [90]. When the surface coating begins to deteriorate due to pro-
longed UV exposure, the hydrophilic surface can cause more dust accumulation. 
4.4.3. Electrodynamic Screen (EDS) 
An electrodynamic screen is a preventive method that utilized an electrostatic field to 
prevent dust deposition on a PV module without the use of water or mechanical parts. The 

<<<PAGE 20>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
20 of 26 
 
 
EDS can restore over 90% of module performance in 2 min in dry, arid, and desert environ-
ments [71,91]. EDS is a fast method of cleaning that needs a high voltage supply to create an 
electrical field. The cross-sectional view of EDS is illustrated in Figure 23 [74,92]. 
In a recent study [92], EDS removed more than 80% of lightly deposited dust, how-
ever, when the dust strongly adhered to the panel, the cleaning system performed poorly. 
The microcontroller with sensors is used to operate the EDS system. Though, UV exposure 
has the potential to degrade the screen. High voltage was required for EDS, which could 
reduce generation efficiency by 15% [75]. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that it is 
ineffective for wet or cemented dust particles. 
 
Figure 23. Electrodynamic screen cross-section view. Reprinted from Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, 22, Sarver T. et al., A comprehensive review of the impact of dust on the use of 
solar energy: History , investigations, results, literature, and mitigation approaches, 698-733., Cop-
yright (2013), with permission from Elsevier [73]. 
5. Discussion 
In Saudi Arabia, desert dust is a major source of dust deposition on solar PV. This is 
mainly due to the geographical location of Saudi Arabia which fall within arid and semi-
arid region. There are local dust sources including the Empty Quarter in the South of 
Saudi Arabia besides remote sources including the Saharan desert which affect mainly the 
western part of Saudi Arabia. The dust accumulation on solar PV modules depends on 
various factors including the site location, precipitation, duration of exposure, wind speed 
and direction, and panel tilt angle. From the literature review, it has been observed that 
the dust accumulation on solar PV mainly increases as the duration of exposure increases, 
especially in spring months where the seasonal analysis indicates that the spring sand and 
dust storms peak which accordingly deteriorates the PV performance. Depending on the 
local environment and other factors, the PV performance may be reduced by somewhere 
between 2% and 50%. A single sandstorm reduced the module power output by 20%. As 
revealed in Dhahran, the PV module was exposed to an outdoor environment and not 
cleaned for 6 months resulting in a power drop of more than 50% [31]. 
According to previous studies it has been observed that the high tilt angle will im-
prove the probability of removing dust particles especially the large ones from solar mod-
ules. However, this might reduce the output power as a result of missing the optimal tilt 
angle which is supposed to yield the maximum output power. Therefore, it is important 
for PV systems designers to select an optimum tilt angle that will minimize dust accumu-
lation and achieve the maximum amount of power available. 
On the other side, compared to the fixed solar system, the solar tracker has been 
demonstrated to reduce dust accumulation on PV panels and could boost PV performance 
by reducing the dust effect by 50%. In our previous work in [15], grid-connected solar PV 

<<<PAGE 21>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
21 of 26 
 
 
systems with six tracking technologies were investigated and compared for Makkah, 
Saudi Arabia. The results show that the two-axis tracking system can produce 34% more 
power than the fixed-axis tracking system. In addition, the vertical axis with continuous 
adjustment demonstrated significant technical and economic performance and was rec-
ommended as the best tracking system for Makkah city’s western region. Therefore, uti-
lizing such a tracking system could minimize dust accumulation and enhance the system 
performance, especially for the potential 2.6 GW solar PV project in Faisaliah Solar Project 
which is proposed for the Makkah region. 
Seven solar PV technologies were tested in the central region under the same condi-
tions and their soiling loss rates varied. This is primarily due to variations in the module 
properties, specifically the front cover’s texture. 
In the context of mitigation strategies, self-cleaning techniques like superhydropho-
bic planes and superhydrophilic planes rely on water to adequately clean the PV module. 
Due to the limited yearly precipitation, it is not recommended to adopt this type of tech-
nology in Saudi Arabia. 
The authors of [60] calculated the levelized cost of energy (LCOE) of cleaning cost for 
the Rumah site in the central region for both manual and machine-assisted cleaning. They 
found that the LCOE for machine-assisted cleaning is 50% less than for manual cleaning 
which improves the overall LCOE by more than 1%. Al-Jawah, in [93], developed a deci-
sion framework to assess PV power plant cleaning alternatives in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. 
The use of sprinklers, physical labor, and a PV panel cleaning robot was found to be the 
optimum cleaning methods, respectively. Cleaning was suggested when the cleaning 
threshold (the difference between clean and dusty panels) reached 3%, 8%, and 8% using 
sprinklers, manual labor, and the robot, respectively. The author claimed that a site with 
higher solar irradiation and higher dust accumulation is preferred to more than one with 
low solar irradiation and lower dust accumulation. 
Currently, the 300 MW Sakaka solar PV project which has an LCOE of US Cents 
2.3417/kWh (a world record-breaking as in February 2018) has a single-axis automatic 
tracking system (from East to West) [5]. Moreover, the project employs a tractor equipped 
with large brushes and water pumps for the cleaning system. Each row of modules will 
be cleaned every 10 days on average to avoid soiling loss. The cleaning strategy in this 
project has successfully maintained the average soiling losses below 1% [94]. The tractors, 
however, require both manpower and water to operate. The tracking system used in this 
project will help minimize dust accumulation while also improving PV performance by 
tracking the path of the sun throughout the day. Additionally, with a very low LCOE, it 
undoubtedly shows that investing in tracking and cleaning systems is feasible. 
Regarding the 1.5 GW Sudair solar PV project in the central region, a bi-facial PV 
solar panels technology will be employed while the solar modules will be equipped with 
a tracking system. In addition, an automatic robotic cleaning system will be operated. This 
project has recorded a significantly low LCOE of US cents 1.239/kWh (2nd lowest cost 
globally for PV power generation as of April 2021) [95]. It is expected to be operational by 
the end of 2022. Compared to the other 6 types of PV tested under soiling in [60], the bi-
facial PV solar panels technology has demonstrated the lowest observed soiling loss. This 
is due to the fact that the back side of these panels is not subjected to soiling losses. More-
over, Sudair PV project is utilizing a tracking system and a robotic cleaning system which 
will maximize the received solar irradiation and minimize the soiling loss efficiently. 
Giving to considerable studies conducted in Saudi Arabia and other arid regions, 
including Bahrain [64], Oman [65], and a desert environment [66], it is strongly advised 
to clean PV panels once a month or fewer to maintain a high-performance system. How-
ever, in the event of a dust storm, it is advised to clean the system immediately to avoid a 
major decline in PV performance. However, planning the cleaning cycles can be aided by 
real-time soiling assessment and dust forecasting. 
According to several studies and actual solar PV projects, dust accumulation and 
cleaning costs are not a significant barrier to large-scale, cost-effective PV deployments in 

<<<PAGE 22>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
22 of 26 
 
 
Saudi Arabia, particularly in the central region, which is considered to be a high-suitable 
region for utility-size PV plants owing to its favorable high solar irradiance, proximity to 
populated areas, mild slope, and proximity to major roads, grid lines, and urban areas, as 
determined by our previous study in [12]. 
6. Conclusions 
When installing solar PV in an arid region with high solar irradiation, as in Saudi 
Arabia, one of the challenging problems is soiling. Dust accumulation has the potential to 
significantly reduce the performance of solar PV modules. The majority of the country is 
subject to desert dust, which is frequently produced by either domestic (like the Empty 
Quarter in the South and Southeast) or overseas (like the Saharan desert in North Africa) 
deserts. 
This review began by describing the process of dust formation on solar PV panels. 
The sources of soiling in Saudi Arabia were then investigated. A detailed review of the 
literature was conducted for related studies investigating the performance of solar PV un-
der soiling from various regions in Saudi Arabia. Furthermore, the effect of PV panel ori-
entation on soiling losses and power output was highlighted in this review. Various mit-
igation strategies have been thoroughly described, with the benefits and drawbacks of 
each technique highlighted. 
The study leads to the following conclusions: 
1. 
Due to Saudi Arabia’s location in a dry, low-precipitation zone with vulnerability to 
dust storms, the investment in cleaning solutions is advised and worthwhile given 
the significant influence that soiling has on solar PV performance. 
2. 
Soiling will not prevent the widespread deployment of PV plants in Saudi Arabia 
and other arid regions if the proper cleaning methods are used. 
3. 
The recommended cleaning cycles of PV panels for the central region in Saudi Arabia 
and similar soiling environments are every month or less to avoid a substantial loss 
in PV performance. Other regions may experience different soiling exposure which 
may need different cleaning frequencies. 
4. 
In the event of a dust storm, it is recommended that the system be cleaned as soon as 
possible to avoid a significant decrease in PV performance. 
5. 
Regarding the fixed solar PV modules, the tilt angle has a strong influence on accu-
mulated dust density. The high tilt angle has improved eliminating dust particles. 
Nevertheless, this might reduce the output power as a result of missing the optimal 
tilt angle. Therefore, PV systems designers have to adjust the tilt angle optimally aim-
ing to minimize dust accumulation and attain the maximum amount of power. 
6. 
It is recommended that Saudi Arabia consider the solar tracking system because, 
compared to a fixed solar PV system, the solar tracker reduces dust deposition on PV 
panels and improves PV performance. 
7. 
The solar PV projects have shown a considerably low levelized cost of energy for the 
central region of Saudi Arabia. It makes use of bi-facial solar panels and is equipped 
with a tracking system and a robotic cleaning mechanism. 
8. 
Self-cleaning strategies, such as superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic planes, 
could help to further lower the frequency and cost of cleaning. They do, however, 
need water to clean the PV module adequately. Due to the low yearly precipitation 
in Saudi Arabia, this type of strategy may be inappropriate to consider. 
Future research should consider the following directions: 
1. 
Using artificial intelligence and other techniques to forecast dust storms is a promis-
ing strategy that will aid plant operators in making plans for the best cleaning oper-
ations for solar PV modules. 
2. 
The selection of the appropriate cleaning and mitigation techniques should be aided 
by a deeper understanding of the dust properties and characteristics in the study area. 

<<<PAGE 23>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
23 of 26 
 
 
3. 
The development of soiling prediction models is crucial for feasibility studies and 
future solar PV plant bidding initiatives. 
4. 
More research is needed to determine how environmental factors such as humidity, 
wind direction, and wind speed impact the efficiency of solar PV systems. 
One of the study’s limitations was the limited research on the soiling effect on solar 
PV performance in Saudi Arabia. They have primarily targeted only several cities in Saudi 
Arabia’s Central, Eastern, and Western regions. Furthermore, dust size and characteriza-
tion studies in Saudi Arabia were insufficient to comprehend the nature and characteris-
tics of dust particles throughout the country. 
Funding: This research received no external funding. 
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
References 
1. 
REN21. Renewables 2022, Global Status Report; REN21: Paris, France, 2022; ISBN 978-3-948393-04-5. 
2. 
IEA. Annual Solar PV Capacity Additions by Application Segment, 2015–2022; IEA: Paris, France, 2022. 
3. 
Saudi 
Vision 
2030 
Vision, 
Energy 
& 
Sustainability. 
Available 
online: 
https://www.vision2030.gov.sa/thekingdom/explore/energy/ (accessed on 12 March 2022). 
4. 
IEA Saudi Arabia—Sudair Solar Plant Project. Available online: https://www.iea.org/policies/14162-saudi-arabia-sudair-solar-
plant-project (accessed on 6 September 2022). 
5. 
ACWA ACWA Power Connects The First Renewable Energy Project in the Kingdom, Sakaka PV IPP, to the National Electricity 
Grid, Commencing Initial Production. Available online: https://www.acwapower.com/news/acwa-power-connects-the-first-
renewable-energy-project-in-the-kingdom-sakaka-pv-ipp-to-the-national-electricity-grid-commencing-initial-production/ 
(accessed on 6 September 2022). 
6. 
LAYLA SOLAR PV IPP. Available online: https://acwapower.com/en/projects/layla-solar-pv-ipp/ (accessed on 6 September 
2022). 
7. 
DMS Acwa Power—GIC—Al Babtain Contracting Company—National Renewable Energy Program (NREP)—Al Faisaliah. 
Available 
online: 
https://www.dmsprojects.net/saudi-arabia/projects/acwa-power-gic-al-babtain-contracting-company-
national-renewable-energy-program-nrep-al-faisaliah-600-mw-solar-pv-plant/PRJ00025968 (accessed on 6 September 2022). 
8. 
Ministry 
of 
Energy 
Renewable 
Energy. 
Available 
online: 
https://www.moenergy.gov.sa/en/OurPrograms/RenewableEnergy/Pages/Initiatives.aspx (accessed on 19 October 2022). 
9. 
Rehman, S.; Aliyu, K.N.; Alhems, L.M.; Mohandes, M.A.; Himri, Y.; Allouhi, A.; Mahbub, M.A. A Comprehensive Global 
Review of Building Integrated Photovoltaic Systems. FME Trans. 2021, 49, 253–268. https://doi.org/10.5937/fme2102253R. 
10. 
Khan, N.; Haq, I.U.; Ullah, F.U.M.; Khan, S.U.; Lee, M.Y. Cl-Net: Convlstm-Based Hybrid Architecture for Batteries’ State of 
Health and Power Consumption Forecasting. Mathematics 2021, 9, 3326. https://doi.org/10.3390/math9243326. 
11. 
Al Garni, H.Z.; Awasthi, A. Solar PV Power Plants Site Selection: A Review. In Advances in Renewable Energies and Power 
Technologies; Yahyaoui, I., Ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2018; pp. 57–75, ISBN 978-0-12-812959-3. 
12. 
Al Garni, H.Z.; Awasthi, A. Solar PV Power Plant Site Selection Using a GIS-AHP Based Approach with Application in Saudi 
Arabia. Appl. Energy 2017, 206C, 1225–1240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.10.024. 
13. 
Al Garni, H.Z.; Awasthi, A.; Wright, D. Optimal Orientation Angles for Maximizing Energy Yield for Solar PV in Saudi Arabia. 
Renew. Energy 2019, 133, 538-550. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.10.048. 
14. 
Rahman, M.M.; Hasanuzzaman, M.; Rahim, N.A. Effects of Various Parameters on PV-Module Power and Efficiency. Energy 
Convers. Manag. 2015, 103, 348–358. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2015.06.067. 
15. 
Al Garni, H.Z.; Awasthi, A.; Ramli, M.A.M. Optimal Design and Analysis of Grid-Connected Photovoltaic under Different 
Tracking Systems Using HOMER. Energy Convers. Manag. 2018, 155, 42–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2017.10.090. 
16. 
Honrubia-Escribano, A.; Ramirez, F.J.; Gómez-Lázaro, E.; Garcia-Villaverde, P.M.; Ruiz-Ortega, M.J.; Parra-Requena, G. 
Influence of Solar Technology in the Economic Performance of PV Power Plants in Europe. A Comprehensive Analysis. Renew. 
Sustain. Energy Rev. 2018, 82, 488–501. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RSER.2017.09.061. 
17. 
Dias, C.L. de A.; Castelo Branco, D.A.; Arouca, M.C.; Loureiro Legey, L.F. Performance Estimation of Photovoltaic Technologies 
in Brazil. Renew. Energy 2017, 114, 367–375. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RENENE.2017.07.033. 
18. 
Othman, R.; Hatem, T.M. Assessment of PV Technologies Outdoor Performance and Commercial Software Estimation in Hot 
and Dry Climates. J. Clean. Prod. 2022, 340, 130819. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2022.130819. 
19. 
Rowlands, I.H.; Kemery, B.P.; Beausoleil-Morrison, I. Optimal Solar-PV Tilt Angle and Azimuth: An Ontario (Canada) Case-
Study. Energy Policy 2011, 39, 1397–1409. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2010.12.012. 
20. 
Hafez, A.Z.; Soliman, A.; El-Metwally, K.A.; Ismail, I.M. Tilt and Azimuth Angles in Solar Energy Applications—A Review. 
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 77, 147–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.03.131. 
21. 
Bingöl, O.; Özkaya, B. Analysis and Comparison of Different PV Array Configurations under Partial Shading Conditions. Sol. 
Energy 2018, 160, 336–343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2017.12.004. 

<<<PAGE 24>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
24 of 26 
 
 
22. 
Ramabadran, R.; Mathur, B. Effect of Shading on Series and Parallel Connected Solar PV Modules. Mod. Appl. Sci. 2009, 3. 
https://doi.org/10.5539/mas.v3n10p32. 
23. 
Bayrak, F.; Ertürk, G.; Oztop, H.F. Effects of Partial Shading on Energy and Exergy Efficiencies for Photovoltaic Panels. J. Clean. 
Prod. 2017, 164, 58–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.06.108. 
24. 
Said, S.A.M.; Hassan, G.; Walwil, H.M.; Al-Aqeeli, N. The Effect of Environmental Factors and Dust Accumulation on 
Photovoltaic Modules and Dust-Accumulation Mitigation Strategies. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2018, 82, 743–760. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.09.042. 
25. 
Agyekum, E.B.; PraveenKumar, S.; Alwan, N.T.; Velkin, V.I.; Shcheklein, S.E. Effect of Dual Surface Cooling of Solar 
Photovoltaic Panel on the Efficiency of the Module: Experimental Investigation. Heliyon 2021, 7, e07920. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e07920. 
26. 
Praveenkumar, S.; Agyekum, E.B.; Alwan, N.T.; Mohammed, A.; Velkin, V.I.; Shcheklein, S.E. Experimental Assessment of 
Thermoelectric Cooling on the Efficiency of PV Module. Int. J. Renew. Energy Res. 2022, 12, 1670-1681. 
27. 
Praveenkumar, S.; Gulakhmadov, A.; Agyekum, E.B.; Alwan, N.T.; Velkin, V.I.; Sharipov, P.; Safaraliev, M.; Chen, X. 
Experimental Study on Performance Enhancement of a Photovoltaic Module Incorporated with CPU Heat Pipe—A 5E Analysis. 
Sensors 2022, 22, 6367. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22176367. 
28. 
PraveenKumar, S.; Agyekum, E.B.; Alwan, N.T.; Velkin, V.I.; Yaqoob, S.J.; Adebayo, T.S. Thermal Management of Solar 
Photovoltaic Module to Enhance Output Performance: An Experimental Passive Cooling Approach Using Discontinuous 
Aluminium Heat Sink. Int. J. Renew. Energy Res. 2021, 11, 1700–1712. https://doi.org/10.20508/IJRER.V11I4.12468.G8323. 
29. 
Agyekum, E.B.; Praveenkumar, S.; Alwan, N.T.; Velkin, V.I.; Adebayo, T.S. Experimental Study on Performance Enhancement 
of a Photovoltaic Module Using a Combination of Phase Change Material and Aluminum Fins—Exergy, Energy and Economic 
(3e) Analysis. Inventions 2021, 6, 69. https://doi.org/10.3390/inventions6040069. 
30. 
Agyekum, E.B.; Praveenkumar, S.; Alwan, N.T.; Velkin, V.I.; Shcheklein, S.E.; Yaqoob, S.J. Experimental Investigation of the 
Effect of a Combination of Active and Passive Cooling Mechanism on the Thermal Characteristics and Efficiency of Solar Pv 
Module. Inventions 2021, 6, 63. https://doi.org/10.3390/inventions6040063. 
31. 
Adinoyi, M.J.; Said, S.A.M. Effect of Dust Accumulation on the Power Outputs of Solar Photovoltaic Modules. Renew. Energy 
2013, 60, 633–636. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2013.06.014 Technical note. 
32. 
Kimber, A.; Mitchell, L.; Nogradi, S.; Wenger, H. The Effect of Soiling on Large Grid-Connected Photovoltaic Systems in 
California and the Southwest Region of the United States. In Proceedings of the Conference Record of the 2006 IEEE 4th World 
Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, WCPEC-4, Waikoloa, HI, USA, 7–12 May 2007; Volume 2, pp. 2391–2395. 
33. 
Conceição, R.; González-Aguilar, J.; Merrouni, A.A.; Romero, M. Soiling Effect in Solar Energy Conversion Systems: A Review. 
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2022, 162, 112434. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2022.112434. 
34. 
Laarabi, B.; El Baqqal, Y.; Rajasekar, N.; Barhdadi, A. Updated Review on Soiling of Solar Photovoltaic Systems Morocco and 
India Contributions. J. Clean. Prod. 2021, 311, 127608. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.127608. 
35. 
Kazem, H.A.; Chaichan, M.T. The Effect of Dust Accumulation and Cleaning Methods on PV Panels’ Outcomes Based on an 
Experimental 
Study 
of 
Six 
Locations 
in 
Northern 
Oman. 
Sol. 
Energy 
2019, 
187, 
30–38. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SOLENER.2019.05.036. 
36. 
Ullah, A.; Amin, A.; Haider, T.; Saleem, M.; Butt, N.Z. Investigation of Soiling Effects, Dust Chemistry and Optimum Cleaning 
Schedule for PV Modules in Lahore, Pakistan. Renew. Energy 2020, 150, 456–468. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RENENE.2019.12.090. 
37. 
Chanchangi, Y.N.; Ghosh, A.; Baig, H.; Sundaram, S.; Mallick, T.K. Soiling on PV Performance Influenced by Weather 
Parameters in Northern Nigeria. Renew. Energy 2021, 180, 874–892. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RENENE.2021.08.090. 
38. 
Felipe A Mejia, J.K. Soiling Losses for Solar Photovoltaic Systems in California. Sol. Energy 2013, 95, 357–363. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2013.06.028. 
39. 
WHO. Ambient Air Pollution: A Global Assessment of Exposure and Burden of Disease; WHO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2016;. 
40. 
Kazem, H.A.; Chaichan, M.T. Experimental Analysis of the Effect of Dust’s Physical Properties on Photovoltaic Modules in 
Northern Oman. Sol. Energy 2016, 139, 68–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2016.09.019. 
41. 
Ciaccioli, A.; Griffo, G.; Visconti, P.; Andria, G. Effects of Dust on Photovoltaic Measurements: A Comparative Study. 
Measurement 2017, 113, 181-188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2017.06.025. 
42. 
Khan, R.A.; Farooqui, S.A.; Khan, M.H. Dust Deposition on PV Module and Its Characteristics Dust Deposition on PV Module 
and Its. In The Effects of Dust and Heat on Photovoltaic Modules: Impacts and Solutions; Springer International Publishing: Cham, 
Switzerland, 2022; ISBN 9783030846350. 
43. 
Moutinho, H.R.; Jiang, C.; To, B.; Perkins, C.; Muller, M.; Simpson, L. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells Adhesion 
Mechanisms on Solar Glass : Effects of Relative Humidity , Surface Roughness , and Particle Shape and Size. Sol. Energy Mater. 
Sol. Cells 2017, 172, 145–153. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2017.07.026. 
44. 
Al Shehri, A.; Parrott, B.; Carrasco, P.; Al Saiari, H.; Taie, I. Impact of Dust Deposition and Brush-Based Dry Cleaning on Glass 
Transmittance for PV Modules Applications. Sol. Energy 2016, 135, 317–324. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2016.06.005. 
45. 
Yilbas, B.S.; Ali, H.; Al-Aqeeli, N.; Khaled, M.M.; Said, S.; Abu-Dheir, N.; Merah, N.; Youcef-Toumi, K.; Varanasi, K.K. 
Characterization of Environmental Dust in the Dammam Area and Mud After-Effects on Bisphenol-A Polycarbonate Sheets. 
Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep24308. 
46. 
Fares, E.; Buffiere, M.; Figgis, B.; Haik, Y.; Isaifan, R.J. Soiling of Photovoltaic Panels in the Gulf Cooperation Council Countries 
and Mitigation Strategies. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2021, 231, 111303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2021.111303. 

<<<PAGE 25>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
25 of 26 
 
 
47. 
Yilbas, B.S.; Hassan, G.; Ali, H.; Al-aqeeli, N. Environmental Dust Effects on Aluminum Surfaces in Humid Air Ambient. Nat. 
Publ. Group 2017, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep45999. 
48. 
Rehman, S.; Bader, M.A.; Al-Moallem, S.A. Cost of Solar Energy Generated Using PV Panels. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2007, 
11, 1843–1857. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2006.03.005. 
49. 
GeoModel Solar. Validation of SolarGIS GHI and DNI Data for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia; GeoModel Solar: Bratislava, Slovakia, 
2013;. 
50. 
Hepbasli, A.; Alsuhaibani, Z. A Key Review on Present Status and Future Directions of Solar Energy Studies and Applications 
in Saudi Arabia. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2011, 15, 5021–5050. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2011.07.052. 
51. 
Tanaka, T.Y.; Chiba, M. A Numerical Study of the Contributions of Dust Source Regions to the Global Dust Budget. Glob. Planet. 
Chang. 2006, 52, 88–104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloplacha.2006.02.002. 
52. 
Butt, M.J.; Mashat, A.S. MODIS Satellite Data Evaluation for Sand and Dust Storm Monitoring in Saudi Arabia. Int. J. Remote 
Sens. 2018, 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1080/01431161.2018.1488293. 
53. 
Villiers, D.; Heerden, V. Dust Storms and Dust at Abu Dhabi International Airport. Weather 2007, 62, 339-343. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/wea.42. 
54. 
Arishi, 
A.A. 
Classification 
of 
Sandstorms 
in 
Saudi 
Arabia. 
Atmos. 
Clim. 
Sci. 
2021, 
11, 
177–193. 
https://doi.org/10.4236/acs.2021.111012. 
55. 
Labban, A.H.; Butt, M.J. Analysis of Sand and Dust Storm Events over Saudi Arabia in Relation with Meteorological Parameters 
and ENSO. Arab. J. Geosci. 2021, 14, 22. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12517-020-06291-w. 
56. 
Notaro, M.; Alkolibi, F.; Fadda, E.; Bakhrjy, F. Trajectory Analysis of Saudi Arabian Dust Storms. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 2013, 
118, 6028–6043. https://doi.org/10.1002/jgrd.50346. 
57. 
Ilse, K.K.; Figgis, B.W.; Naumann, V.; Hagendorf, C.; Csp, S.; Saale, H. Fundamentals of Soiling Processes on Photovoltaic 
Modules. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2018, 98, 239–254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.09.015. 
58. 
Said, S.A.M. Effects of Dust Accumulation on Performances of Thermal and Photovoltaic Flat-Plate Collectors. Appl. Energy 
1990, 37, 73–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/0306-2619(90)90019-A. 
59. 
Said, S.A.M.; Walwil, H.M. Fundamental Studies on Dust Fouling Effects on PV Module Performance. Sol. Energy 2014, 107, 
328–337. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2014.05.048. 
60. 
Jones, R.K.; Baras, A.; Saeeri, A. Al; Al Qahtani, A.; Al Amoudi, A.O.; Al Shaya, Y.; Alodan, M.; Al-Hsaien, S.A. Optimized 
Cleaning Cost and Schedule Based on Observed Soiling Conditions for Photovoltaic Plants in Central Saudi Arabia. IEEE J. 
Photovolt. 2016, 6, 730–738. https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2016.2535308. 
61. 
Ibrahim, A. Effect of Shadow and Dust on the Performance of Silicon Solar Cell Effect of Shadow and Dust on the Performance 
of Silicon Solar Cell. J. Basic Appl. Sci. Res. 2011, 1, 222–230. 
62. 
Benghanem, M.; Almohammedi, A.; Taukeer Khan, M.; Al-Masraqi, A. Effect of Dust Accumulation on the Performance of 
Photovoltaic Panels in Desert Countries: A Case Study for Madinah, Saudi Arabia. Int. J. Power Electron. Drive Syst. (IJPEDS) 
2018, 9, 1356. https://doi.org/10.11591/ijpeds.v9.i3.pp1356-1366. 
63. 
Khayyat, A.M.Z.; Alharthi, A.H.; Almohammadi, F.L.; Almarwani, Z.S.; Kannan, N.; Mobarak, Y. The Soiling Impact Effects on 
the Performance of the Solar Panels in Rabigh, Saudi Arabia. Adv. Comput. Intell. Technol. 2022, 914, 429–440. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-2980-9_35. 
64. 
John, J.J.; Warade, S.; Tamizhmani, G.; Kottantharayil, A. Study of Soiling Loss on Photovoltaic Modules with Artificially 
Deposited Dust of Different Gravimetric Densities and Compositions Collected from Different Locations in India. IEEE J. 
Photovolt. 2016, 6, 236–243. https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2015.2495208. 
65. 
Kazmerski, L.L.; Al Jardan, M.; Al Jnoobi, Y.; Al Shaya, Y.; John, J.J. Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust: Averting a Potential 
Showstopper for Solar Photovoltaics. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE 40th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference, PVSC 2014, 
Denver, CO, USA, 8–13 June 2014; pp. 187–192. 
66. 
Mehmood, U.; Al-Sulaiman, F.A.; Yilbas, B.S. Characterization of Dust Collected from PV Modules in the Area of Dhahran, 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and Its Impact on Protective Transparent Covers for Photovoltaic Applications. Sol. Energy 2017, 141, 
203–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2016.11.051. 
67. 
Engelbrecht, J.P.; Mcdonald, E.V.; Gillies, J.A.; Jayanty, R.K.M.; Gertler, A.W. Characterizing Mineral Dusts and Other Aerosols 
from the Middle East—Part 1 : Ambient Sampling. Inhal. Toxicol. 2009, 21, 297–326. https://doi.org/10.1080/08958370802464273. 
68. 
Shenouda, R.; Kandil, H.A. A Review of Dust Accumulation on PV Panels in the MENA and the Far East Regions. J. Eng. Appl. 
Sci. 2022, 69, 8. https://doi.org/10.1186/s44147-021-00052-6. 
69. 
Chanchangi, Y.N.; Ghosh, A.; Sundaram, S.; Mallick, T.K. Dust and PV Performance in Nigeria: A Review. Renew. Sustain. 
Energy Rev. 2020, 121, 109704. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.109704. 
70. 
Picotti, G.; Borghesani, P.; Cholette, M.E.; Manzolini, G. Soiling of Solar Collectors—Modelling Approaches for Airborne Dust 
and Its Interactions with Surfaces. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 81, 2343-2357. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.06.043. 
71. 
Juzaili, W.; Abdul, H.; Shaari, S.; Salam, Z. Performance Degradation of Photovoltaic Power System : Review on Mitigation 
Methods. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 67, 876–891. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.09.072. 
72. 
Gupta, V.; Sharma, M.; Kumar, R.; Babu, K.N.D. Comprehensive Review on Effect of Dust on Solar Photovoltaic System and 
Mitigation Techniques. Sol. Energy 2019, 191, 596–622. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.08.079. 
73. 
Sarver, T.; Al-qaraghuli, A.; Kazmerski, L.L. A Comprehensive Review of the Impact of Dust on the Use of Solar Energy: History, 
Investigations, Results, Literature, and Mitigation Approaches. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2013, 22, 698–733. 

<<<PAGE 26>>>
Energies 2022, 15, 8033 
26 of 26 
 
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2012.12.065. 
74. 
Ghazi, S.; Sayigh, A.; Ip, K. Dust Effect on Flat Surfaces—A Review Paper. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2014, 33, 742–751. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.02.016. 
75. 
Deb, D.; Brahmbhatt, N.L. Review of Yield Increase of Solar Panels through Soiling Prevention , and a Proposed Water-Free 
Automated Cleaning Solution. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 82, 3306-3313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.10.014. 
76. 
Hudedmani, M.G.; Joshi, G.; Umayal, R.M.; Revankar, A. A Comparative Study of Dust Cleaning Methods for the Solar PV 
Panels. Adv. J. Grad. Res. 2017, 1, 24–29. https://doi.org/10.21467/ajgr.1.1.24-29. 
77. 
Lu, H.; Lu, L.; Wang, Y. Numerical Investigation of Dust Pollution on a Solar Photovoltaic ( PV ) System Mounted on an Isolated 
Building. Appl. Energy 2016, 180, 27–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.07.030. 
78. 
BOSON Dust Shall Never Shade the Brightness. Available online: https://bosonrobotics.com/en/products/robot (accessed on 14 
September 2022). 
79. 
Israar Israar. Available online: https://www.israar.com/PVCleaningMachine.php#overview (accessed on 28 September 2022). 
80. 
Kumar, N.M.; Sudhakar, K.; Samykano, M.; Jayaseelan, V. On the Technologies Empowering Drones for Intelligent Monitoring 
of Solar Photovoltaic Power Plants. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2018, 133, 585–593. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2018.07.087. 
81. 
Gallardo-Saavedra, S.; Hernández-Callejo, L.; Duque-Perez, O. Technological Review of the Instrumentation Used in Aerial 
Thermographic 
Inspection 
of 
Photovoltaic 
Plants. 
Renew. 
Sustain. 
Energy 
Rev. 
2018, 
93, 
566–579. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.05.027. 
82. 
Al-Housani, M.; Bicer, Y.; Koç, M. Experimental Investigations on PV Cleaning of Large-Scale Solar Power Plants in Desert 
Climates: Comparison of Cleaning Techniques for Drone Retrofitting. Energy Convers. Manag. 2019, 185, 800–815. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2019.01.058. 
83. 
Cleandrone Cleandrone. Available online: http://www.cleandrone.com/cleandrone-2/ (accessed on 17 September 2022). 
84. 
Dronevolt Dronevolt. Available online: https://www.dronevolt.com/en/expert-solutions/hercules-10-spray/# (accessed on 17 
September 2022). 
85. 
Aerial Power Aerial Power. Available online: https://www.aerialpower.com/ (accessed on 17 September 2022). 
86. 
Williams, R.B.; Tanimoto, R.; Simonyan, A.; Fuerstenau, S. Vibration Characterization of Self-Cleaning Solar Panels with 
Piezoceramic Actuation. In Proceedings of the Structural Dynamics and Materials Conference, Honolulu, HI, USA, 23–26 April 
2007; p. 512. 
87. 
Indiamart Solar Panels—Super Hydrophobic Coating. Available online: https://www.indiamart.com/proddetail/solar-panels-
super-hydrophobic-coating-one-kit-good-for-50-panel-2-mtr-x-1-mtr-22056797862.html (accessed on 18 September 2022). 
88. 
Drelich, J.; Chibowski, E.; Meng, D.D.; Terpilowski, K. Hydrophilic and Superhydrophilic Surfaces and Materials. Soft Matter 
2011, 7, 9804-9828. https://doi.org/10.1039/C1SM05849E. 
89. 
Bǎlţatu, M.S.; Vizureanu, P.; Bǎlan, T.; Lohan, M.; Ţugui, C.A. Preliminary Tests for Ti-Mo-Zr-Ta Alloys as Potential 
Biomaterials. IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2018, 374, 012023. https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899X/374/1/012023. 
90. 
Nishimoto, S.; Bharat, B. Bioinspired Self-Cleaning Surfaces with Superhydrophobicity, Superoleophobicity, and 
Superhydrophilicity. RSC Adv. 2013, 3, 671–690. 
91. 
Mazumder, M.; Horenstein, M.N.; Stark, J.W.; Girouard, P.; Sumner, R.; Henderson, B.; Sadder, O.; Hidetaka, I.; Biris, A.S.; 
Sharma, R. Characterization of Electrodynamic Screen Performance for Dust Removal from Solar Panels and Solar Hydrogen 
Generators. IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. 2013, 49, 1793–1800. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIA.2013.2258391. 
92. 
Kawamoto, H. Improved Detachable Electrodynamic Cleaning System for Dust Removal from Soiled Photovoltaic Panels. J. 
Electrost. 2020, 107, 103481. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elstat.2020.103481. 
93. 
Al-Jawah, M. A Decision Aiding Framework for Investing in Cleaning Systems for Solar Photovoltaic (PV) Power Plants in Arid 
Regions. Ph.D. Thesis, George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA, 2014. 
94. 
KFUPM Forum|Effects of Soiling on Solar Energy Applications: Challenges and Mitigation Techniques. Available online: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-TF5UF7h2oA (accessed on 25 September 2022). 
95. 
ACWA SUDAIR PV IPP. Available online: https://acwapower.com/en/projects/sudair-pv-ipp/ (accessed on 24 September 2022). 
 
