
<<<PAGE 1>>>
 Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Task 13 Report Template 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems 
Soiling Losses – Impact 
on the Performance of 
Photovoltaic Power 
Plants 
2022 
Report IEA-PVPS T13-21:2022 
PVPS 

<<<PAGE 2>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
 
What is IEA PVPS TCP? 
The International Energy Agency (IEA), founded in 1974, is an autonomous body within the framework of the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD). The Technology Collaboration Programme (TCP) was created with the belief that the future of energy 
security and sustainability starts with global collaboration. The programme is made up of 6.000 experts across government, academia, and 
industry dedicated to advancing common research and the application of specific energy technologies. 
The IEA Photovoltaic Power Systems Programme (IEA PVPS) is one of the TCPs within the IEA and was established in 1993. The mission 
of the programme is to “enhance the international collaborative efforts which facilitate the role of photovoltaic solar energy as a cornerstone 
in the transition to sustainable energy systems.” In order to achieve this goal, the programme’s participants have undertaken a variety of joint 
research projects in photovoltaic (PV) power systems applications. The overall programme is headed by an Executive Committee, comprising 
one delegate from each country or organizational member, which designates distinct ‘Tasks’ that may be research projects or activity areas. 
The IEA PVPS participating countries are Australia, Austria, Canada, Chile, China, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan, 
Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, and the 
United States of America. The European Commission, Solar Power Europe, Smart Electric Power Alliance (SEPA), and Solar Energy Indus-
tries Association are also members. 
Visit us at: www.iea-pvps.org 
What is IEA PVPS Task 13? 
Within the framework of the IEA PVPS, Task 13 aims to support market actors working to improve the operation, reliability and quality of PV 
components and systems. Operational data from PV systems in different climate zones compiled within the project will help provide the basis 
for estimates of the reliability and performance of the current PV systems. 
Task 13 provides a common platform to summarize and report on technical aspects affecting the quality, performance, reliability and lifetime 
of PV systems in a wide variety of environments and applications. By working together across national boundaries, we can all take advantage 
of research and experience from each member country and combine and integrate this knowledge into valuable summaries of best practices 
and methods for ensuring that PV systems perform at their optimum and continue to provide competitive return on investment. 
Task 13 has established a framework for calculations of various parameters that provide an indication of the quality of PV components and 
systems. The framework, along with the results included in the high-quality reports, is useful to and appreciated by the solar PV industry. 
The IEA PVPS countries participating in Task 13 are Australia, Austria, Belgium*, Canada, Chile, China, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, 
Israel, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, and the United States of America. 
This report addresses global soiling of PV power plants with the aim to provide information on the impact of dust soiling and snow losses for 
various stakeholders. Further information and results of Task 13 can be found at: https://iea-pvps.org/research-tasks/performance-operation-
and-reliability-of-photovoltaic-systems/. 
* Belgium is no longer participating in IEA PVPS, effective from 01 July, 2022. 
 
DISCLAIMER 
The IEA PVPS TCP is organised under the auspices of the International Energy Agency (IEA) but is functionally and legally autonomous. Views, findings and publica-
tions of the IEA PVPS TCP do not necessarily represent the views or policies of the IEA Secretariat or its individual member countries. 
COVER PICTURE 
 
Soiling in a PV plant in Atacama Desert, Chile. Source: Fraunhofer ISE/Andreas Steinhüser 
ISBN 978-3-907281-09-3: Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 

<<<PAGE 3>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
 
 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY 
PHOTOVOLTAIC POWER SYSTEMS PROGRAMME 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IEA PVPS Task 13 
Performance, Operation and 
Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems 
 
 
Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of 
Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
 
 
Report IEA‐PVPS T13‐21:2022 
December 2022 
 
 
ISBN 978-3-907281-09-3 
 
 
 

<<<PAGE 4>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
4 
AUTHORS 
Main Authors 
 
Christian Schill, Fraunhofer ISE, Freiburg, Germany 
 
Anne Anderson, Research Institutes of Sweden AB (RISE), Sweden 
 
Christopher Baldus-Jeursen, CANMET Energy Technology Centre, Canada 
 
Laurie Burnham, Sandia National Laboratories, USA 
 
Leonardo Micheli, Universidad de Jaén, Spain 
 
David Parlevliet, Murdoch University, Perth, Australia 
 
Eric Pilat, CEA INES, France 
 
Bengt Stridh, Mälardalens högskola, Sweden 
 
Elías Urrejola, Atamostec, Chile 
Contributing Authors 
 
Manjunath Basappa Ayanna, CSIR, South Africa 
 
Gianluca Cattaneo, Centre Suisse d'Electronique et de Microtechnique, Swit-
zerland 
 
Sebastian-Johannes Ernst, Fraunhofer ISE, Germany 
 
Anil Kottantharayil, NCPRE, IIT Bombay, India 
 
Gerhard Mathiak, DEWA Research & Development Center, United Arab Emir-
ates 
 
Erin Whitney, University of Alaska Fairbanks, USA 
 
Rosmarie Neukomm, Bern University of Applied Sciences, Switzerland 
 
Delphine Petri, Centre Suisse d'Electronique et de Microtechnique, Switzerland 
 
Lawrence Pratt, CSIR, South Africa 
 
Lina Rustam, Fraunhofer ISE, Germany 
 
Thomas Schott, Bern University of Applied Sciences, Switzerland 
Editor 
 
Ulrike Jahn, VDE Renewables, Alzenau, Germany 
 
 
 

<<<PAGE 5>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
5 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Acknowledgements .................................................................................................. 7 
List of Abbreviations ................................................................................................. 8 
Executive Summary ............................................................................................... 11 
 
Introduction ...................................................................................................... 14 
 
Physical and Chemical Principles of Soiling ..................................................... 20 
2.1 
Physical and Chemical Nature of Dust ................................................... 20 
2.2 
Cementation, Caking, Capillary Aging .................................................... 23 
2.3 
Dew-Driven Soiling Mechanisms ............................................................ 25 
2.4 
Review of Moisture in Soiling .................................................................. 27 
2.5 
Overview of Particle Deposition and Adhesion Forces: Van der Waals, 
Capillary, Electrostatic, and Gravitational Forces .................................... 28 
 
Sensing Soiling and Snow ............................................................................... 31 
3.1 
Soiling Metrics ........................................................................................ 31 
3.2 
Market Overview of Soiling and Snow Sensors ...................................... 34 
 
Soiling and Snow Models ................................................................................ 41 
4.1 
Soiling Models ........................................................................................ 41 
4.2 
Snow Models .......................................................................................... 50 
 
Estimation of Energy and Revenue Losses of Soiling at Utility Scale ............... 56 
5.1 
Economic Impact of Soiling .................................................................... 56 
5.2 
Soiling Losses Worldwide: Resources and Variability ............................. 59 
5.3 
Case Study: Long-Term Soiling Losses in a Moderate Climate .............. 60 
 
Mitigation of Soiling Losses in PV Systems ..................................................... 63 
6.1 
Preventive Mitigation Methods ................................................................ 64 
6.2 
Corrective Mitigation Methods ................................................................ 71 
6.3 
Generic “Best-Time-to-Clean” Models .................................................... 82 
6.4 
Snow Impact Mitigation Strategies .......................................................... 87 
 
Snow Shading of Photovoltaic Systems ........................................................... 89 
7.1 
Introduction ............................................................................................ 89 
7.2 
Performance Factors for PV Systems at High Latitudes ......................... 90 
7.3 
Global Distribution of Snow .................................................................... 92 
7.4 
Focus Areas for Snow Research ............................................................ 94 
7.5 
Snow-Loss Metrics ................................................................................. 95 

<<<PAGE 6>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
6 
7.6 
Design Optimization for Snowy Climates .............................................. 100 
 
Conclusion..................................................................................................... 108 
Appendix 1: Particle Composition and Solubility ................................................... 110 
Appendix 2: Dust Composition Survey ................................................................. 112 
Appendix 3: Macroscopic, Controllable and Microscopic Factors Influencing Soiling
 ...................................................................................................................... 114 
References ........................................................................................................... 117 
 
 

<<<PAGE 7>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
7 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This paper received valuable contributions from several IEA-PVPS Task 13 members and 
other international experts, as outlined below. 
 
This report is supported by the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy 
(BMWi) under contract no. 0324304A and no. 0324304B. 
Part of this work was funded through the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and inno-
vation programme under the NoSoilPV project (Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 
793120). 
Anil Kottantharayil would like to acknowledge co-workers S. Bhaduri, S. Chattopadhyay, S. 
Zachariah, and C. S. Solanki from NCPRE, IIT Bombay for contributions to the work reported 
in the subchapter “New Module- and Plant Concepts”. 
Lina Rustam would like to acknowledge Klemens Ilse, Fraunhofer CSP, Germany, for contri-
butions to subchapter “Anti-Soiling Coatings”. 
Erin Whitney would like to acknowledge colleagues Christopher Pike, Michelle Wilber, Dr. 
Joshua Stein, Dayne Broderson, Rob Bensin, David Light, Henry Toal, Iris Tuller, and Christie 
Haupert for their contributions to the University of Alaska Fairbanks Solar Test Site and data 
analysis efforts. The Solar Test Site and its resulting data were made possible through a 
Cooperative Research and Development Agreement (CRADA) between the University of 
Alaska and Sandia National Laboratories as well as generous support from the United States 
Department of the Navy, Office of Naval Research. 
Many thanks go to Erin Whitney and colleagues for the editing of the executive summary, 
technical and language editing and proof-reading of this report, and also to Leonardo Micheli 
for technical editing and support. Your help and support is highly appreciated. 

<<<PAGE 8>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
8 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
AFm 
Alumina, Ferric Oxide, Mono-Sulfate 
AI 
Artificial Intelligence 
Al 
Aluminium 
ANN 
Artificial Neural Network 
ANOVA 
Analysis of Variance 
AOD 
Aerosol Optical Depth 
ARC 
Anti-Reflection Coating 
ASC 
Anti-Soiling-Coating 
ASTM 
American Society for Testing and Materials 
BFH 
Bern University of Applied Science 
BoS 
Balance of System 
Ca 
Calcium 
CA 
Contact Angle 
CAMS 
Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service 
Cd 
Cadmium 
CIS 
Copper Indium Selenide 
Cl 
Chlorine 
cm² 
Square-Centimetre 
CMAQ 
Community Multiscale Air Quality 
CPL 
Cost of Production Losses 
CSP 
Concentrating Solar Power 
CWEEDS 
Canadian Weather Energy and Engineering Data Sets 
D 
Particle Diameter 
DNI 
Direct Normal Irradiance 
DOI 
Digital Object Identifier 
ECMWF 
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecast 
EDS 
Electrodynamic Shield 
EDX 
Energy Dispersive X-Ray 
EMC 
Electromagnetic Compatibility 
EP 
Electricity Price 
EPC 
Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
ESD 
Electrostatic Discharge 
EVA 
Ethylene-Vinyl Acetate 
G 
Gravitational Acceleration 
GHCN 
Global Historical Climatology Network 
H 
Hydrogen 

<<<PAGE 9>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
9 
HR 
Hygrometry 
IEA 
International Energy Agency 
IEC 
International Electrotechnical Commission 
IEEE 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
IPCC 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
IR 
Infrared 
Isc 
Short Circuit Current 
I-V 
Current-Voltage 
K 
Potassium 
kHz 
Kilohertz 
kV 
Kilovolts 
kWh 
Kilo-Watthour 
LCOE 
Levelized Cost of Energy 
LED 
Light Emitting Diode 
MERRA 
Modern Era Retrospective-Analysis for Research and Appli-
cations 
mg 
Milligram 
Mg 
Magnesium 
MW 
Megawatt 
N 
Nitrogen 
Na 
Sodium 
NASA 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
NCPRE 
National Centre for Photovoltaic Research and Education 
NNE 
North-North-East 
NNW 
North-North-West 
NOCT 
Normal Operating Cell Temperature 
NPV 
Net Present Value 
NREL 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory 
O 
Oxygen 
O&M 
Operation & Maintenance 
PA 
Polyamide 
PDF 
Powder Diffraction File 
PE 
Polyester 
PM 
Particle Mass 
PM10 
Particulate Matter of Size of 10 Microns and Below 
Pmpp 
Maximum Power Point 
POA 
Plane of Array 
PV 
Photovoltaic 

<<<PAGE 10>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
10 
 
 
RH 
Relative Humidity 
S 
Sulphur 
SAM 
System Advisor Model 
SDS-WAS 
Sand and Dust Storm Warning Advisory and Assessment 
System 
SEM 
Scanning Electron Microscopy 
Si 
Silicon 
Soiling Rate 
Daily Variation in Soiling Ratio while Soiling Deposits on PV 
Module Surface 
Soiling Ratio SR 
Current Soiling State of the System 
SR 
Spectral Response 
STC 
Standard Testing Conditions 
SUNY 
State University of New York 
SVI 
Soiling Variability Index 
Ta 
Ambient Temperature 
TEM 
Transmission Electron Microscopy 
TSP 
Total Suspended Particles 
TSPM 
Total Suspended Particulate Matter 
VAC 
Volts Alternating Current 
VDC 
Volts Direct Current 
VDI 
Verein Deutscher Ingenieure, Association of German Engi-
neers 
Voc 
Open Circuit Voltage 
W 
Watt 
WD 
Wind Direction 
WMO 
World Meteorological Organization 
Wp 
Watt Peak 
WS 
Wind Speed 
XRD 
X-Ray Diffraction 
Α 
Temperature Coefficient 
Μ 
Dynamic Viscosity of Air 
Μm 
Micro-Metre 
Ρ 
Particle Density 
 

<<<PAGE 11>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
11 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
On a global scale, the soiling of solar photovoltaic (PV) systems from dust and snow, and 
subsequent loss of energy yield, is the single most influential factor impacting system yield 
after irradiance. Especially in arid regions, soiling may affect large utility-scale PV plants to a 
significant extent – making it necessary to mitigate these effects by cleaning whole systems – 
and thus leading to a reduction of revenues, caused by higher operating and/or capital expend-
itures (e.g., for investments in anti-soiling coatings [ASC] or cleaning robots and their mainte-
nance). 
This report therefore summarizes aspects of soiling from different perspectives including par-
ticle types and global distributions (Chapter 1), mechanisms and contributing factors (Chap-
ter 2), sensors and measurement techniques (Chapter 3), modelling approaches and results 
(Chapter 4), economic impacts (Chapter 5), mitigation strategies (Chapter 6), and special in-
stallation and operation considerations for snow shading as solar arrays increasingly prolifer-
ate into higher latitudes (Chapter 7). The report is intended to serve the communities of PV 
customers, PV industry, O&M companies, investors, asset managers, testing equipment de-
velopers, testing companies, standardization authorities and research institutions alike. 
Chapter 1 (Introduction) provides an overview of particle sizes, types, and global distributions 
and impacts. In particular, global surveys show the highest total suspended particle densities 
(100-200 µg/m3) in equatorial regions around Africa and Asia, not including snow shading ef-
fects at high latitudes. 
Chapter 2 (Physical and Chemical Principles of Soiling) characterizes the factors contributing 
to dust particle deposition and adhesion on glass and PV module. Silt size particles in the 
range of 2 µm to 63 µm are the predominant contributors to soiling in arid and semi-arid cli-
mates, as can be seen from analyses in the Atacama Desert, Chile, and Qatar. Gravitational 
forces contribute to shorter airborne times for medium to large particles (>10 µm), while smaller 
particles (<5 µm) remain airborne longer due to air turbulence, and very small particles (<1 µm) 
are easily removed from the atmosphere by rain and do not deposit. The basic soiling formation 
processes of cementation, capillary aging, and caking are described, all of which have specific 
effects on the severity, persistence, and resistance to removal. Dew formation also plays a 
role, often increasing particle deposition rates as illustrated with an example from the Atacama 
Desert, in conditions of ambient high humidity combined with radiative cooling of PV modules 
due to the high infrared emissivity of solar glass. A review of deposition and adhesion forces 
asserts that particles smaller than 10 µm are rarely removed by wind from PV modules. 
Chapter 3 (Sensing Soiling and Snow) provides insight into how to measure soiling, with what 
kind of sensors, their metrics, and different principles of operation, which can be categorised 
into electrical (short-circuit current and power) and optical (image processing cameras, LEDs, 
and reflectance measurements). This information is critical for predictions of future soiling rates 
and cleaning decision timelines. Metrics generally comprise a soiling ratio and soiling rate. 
Soiling does not always occur homogenously over the whole module surface or plant, and 
tends to accumulate in the lower parts of modules. In particular, if soiling is not distributed 
uniformly, the short circuit current measurements may underestimate the actual impact of soil-
ing on PV power. As such, an underestimated cost factor is the integration of multiple soiling 
monitors into the overall monitoring infrastructure to account for this heterogeneity. IEC Stand-
ard 61724 "Photovoltaic system performance - Part 1: Monitoring" provides recommendations 
of when and where to measure soiling on site and how often to clean sensors in order to 
produce reliable results. On a general note, with regard to soiling sensor measurement 

<<<PAGE 12>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
12 
accuracy, more study is needed to quantify measurement uncertainty of different soiling sens-
ing products. 
Chapter 4 (Soiling and Snow Models) summarizes efforts to develop methods of modelling 
soiling based on different sets of parameters. These models can be categorised as micro-, 
regional- and macro models, and all have their strengths and weaknesses. The report differ-
entiates between linear-regression, semi-physical, artificial neural network, and geospatial 
models, all of which have their specific fields of application, advantages, and disadvantages. 
Most of the models are calibrated against local phenomena. To date, globally applicable mod-
els tend to forecast the correct trends for higher soiling losses but correlate poorly with minor 
losses. Snow shedding models are also discussed and differentiated into the two categories 
of direct energy loss prediction and snow coverage prediction. Chapter 4 concludes with a 
Canadian case study that estimates energy losses predicted by two different snow models as 
predictors for soiling phenomenon in high latitudes. More work is still needed to understand 
the causes of discrepancy and to validate the models with more sites. 
To provide a better overview of the global and economic dimensions of the problem, the report 
estimates the energy losses for PV plants on a global scale in Chapter 5 (Estimation of Energy 
and Revenue Losses of Soiling at Utility Scale). It is estimated that in 2018, soiling caused a 
loss of the annual PV energy production of at least 3-4%, which corresponded to an economic 
loss in the order of three to five billion euros. It is expected that these kinds of losses will 
translate to 4-5% in energy production, leading to subsequent financial losses in the range of 
four to seven billion euros by 2023. This is due to several factors. For example, more PV 
modules are installed in high-insolation regions, such as China or India, which are also more 
exposed to soiling. The reduced price of electricity in some regions will make cleaning “less 
convenient” because revenues for recovered energy will be lower. And, lastly, under identical 
soiling conditions, more efficient modules are subject to larger energy losses compared to less 
efficient PV modules. Various economic models have been proposed to identify the best fitting 
cleaning schedule under different constraints, in order to minimize revenue losses. Chapter 5 
and Chapter 6 examine these kinds of models and the promises they make. 
Two categories of possible mitigation strategies are summarized in Chapter 6 (Mitigation of 
Soiling Losses in PV Systems The first is preventive methods such as site assessment and 
planning, new module and plant concepts, as well as anti-soiling coatings. The second is cor-
rective mitigation methods such as different types of cleaning (by wet/dry brushes, cleaning 
robots, electrodynamic cleaning, etc.). Chapter 6 also provides an overview of generic “Best 
Time-to-Clean” models as decision support tools for triggering cleaning operations on site. 
PV systems in high latitudes are proliferating due to the advent of bifacial modules, higher 
system efficiencies, and lower costs. Chapter 7 (Snow Shading of Photovoltaic Systems) sum-
marizes aspects of snow shading of PV systems, with an emphasis on performance factors 
like temperature, irradiance, albedo, and their global distribution. Focus areas for “snow re-
search” are then highlighted, i.e., assessing snow losses, performance modelling, and perfor-
mance optimization, as well as reliability aspects related to thermo-mechanical load stresses. 
These load stresses are exacerbated by extreme winter storms and freeze/thaw cycles that 
can crack solar cells, distort module frames, and damage coatings, resulting in under-perform-
ing and failed modules. Chapter 7 then defines snow loss metrics and finally suggests design 
optimisations for snowy climates by demonstrating that climate-specific technological and de-
sign choices can lead to measurable efficiency gains. Choices fall into categories like module 
architecture (e.g., frame vs. frameless, cell stringing, etc.), module technology (cell size, cell 
design, bifacial vs. mono-facial) and finally system design (module orientation, height above 
ground, tilt angle, clip design and placement). To mitigate production losses, promising 

<<<PAGE 13>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
13 
considerations for high latitude solar installations include frameless modules, steeper tilt an-
gles, snow-shedding coatings, bifacial modules, and attention to array heights to minimize 
snow accumulation on the bottom edges of modules, among other factors. 

<<<PAGE 14>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
14 
 INTRODUCTION 
Especially in arid regions and snow prone areas, shading from mineral dust and snow and the 
subsequent losses in performance for PV installations present substantial challenges for the 
PV industry. Mitigation for these effects can lead to a reduction of revenues, caused by higher 
operating and/or capital expenditures (e.g., for the investments in anti-soiling coatings [ASC] 
or cleaning robots and their maintenance). The continued growth of the PV industry worldwide 
into arid and snowy regions requires an understanding of soiling processes, impacts, and mit-
igation measures. 
Deposition of dust on inclined surfaces – either with or without anti-soiling coatings – is a com-
plex and multidimensional phenomenon. The primary parameters are local environmental con-
ditions like relative humidity and the occurrence of dew, wind speed and direction, precipitation 
frequency and intensity, soil type, and topography of the terrain [1]. However, there are also 
larger-scale effects such as dust transport over hundreds of kilometres. Other factors like land 
use and land cover are examples of anthropogenic activity that impact the potential for soiling, 
e.g., by agricultural activity. 
The size of wind-blown dust particles are in the range of 1-100 µm, with PM10 and PM2.5, as 
shown in Figure 1: 
 
 
Figure 1: Particle size distributions, kind permission by TSI. 

<<<PAGE 15>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
15 
Particle sizes below 10 µm or 2.5 µm, respectively, are among the best proxies to model soiling 
[2], [3], as detailed in Chapter 4. Soiling is a very site-specific problem and may vary seasonally 
and annually. [4], [2]. Javed and colleagues [1] have shown that environmental factors like the 
ones mentioned above have a loose correlation with the daily degree of soiling. 
Figure 2 below shows the seasonal variation of airborne dust intensity around the world. It is 
derived from Aerosol-Optical-Depths (AOD) satellite time series measurements. The darker 
regions indicate areas with higher densities of dust. It is notable that Saharan dust plumes are 
transported hundreds of kilometres over the Atlantic to reach the Americas. 
 
 
Figure 2: Total suspended particle density derived from a typical dust year. 
 
The global dimensions of this phenomenon and especially the energy and revenue losses for 
PV installations are immense, as discussed further in Chapter 5. 
Taking a closer look at its components, soiling consists of the accumulation of dust, dirt and 
contaminants on the glass surface of photovoltaic modules. The driving factors behind the 
formation of soiling are physical and chemical characteristics of the dust and processes known 
as cementation, caking and capillary aging. Humidity increases the adhesion and cementation 
of dust on PV surfaces [5], [6], [7]. Chapter 2 explores these basic principles of soiling. 
The deposited soiling layer causes optical losses, reducing the number of photons that reach 
the solar cells and, consequently, diminishing performance. The optical losses are due to the 
absorbance, reflectance, and dispersion of the incident light because of the presence of dust 
(Figure 3) [8]. These effects can be partly mitigated by applying anti-soiling coatings (ASC). 

<<<PAGE 16>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
16 
 
Figure 3: The impact on incident light from soiling on a photovoltaic glass. Diagram 
made by Al Hicks (NREL, USA) and sourced from [9]. 
Chapter 3 “Sensing Soiling and Snow” will detail the available sensor solutions on the market 
to assess the amount of soiling at PV sites. These sensors have quite different operating prin-
ciples. Ideally, sensors should be maintenance free, as many PV sites will be unmanned in the 
coming years. Sensing soiling can serve different purposes, e.g., to find the best time to clean 
a plant or to determine the system losses, even on a global scale. 
Although soiling is not recognized as a PV module failure [10], its detrimental effect on reducing 
the electrical output of PV solar panels is well known. 
Many different case studies all over the world can be found in the literature, and several authors 
have compiled extensive overview lists with cases studies [11], [12] that have been extended 
with the NREL (National Renewable Energy Laboratory) soiling map of the US, NCPRE (Na-
tional Centre for Photovoltaic Research and Education) soiling cases by J. Josephson, and 
other available sources in the literature. Figure 4 shows these studies in the world harmonized 
soil map for mid-range latitudes1. 
 
1 http://www.fao.org/soils-portal/soil-survey/soil-maps-and-databases/harmonized-world-soil-database-v12/en/ 

<<<PAGE 17>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
17 
 
 
 
Figure 4: The soil classes of the world with selected soiling case studies. 
These studies are difficult to compare and standardize, however, since different metrics may 
be used, and studies are sometimes conducted only for a short amount of time, e.g., several 
weeks. To compare soiling studies on a global scale, soiling studies should be conducted for 
at least a full vegetation growing cycle to account for seasonal and temporal aspects (see 
above). 
To cite some examples from the literature, 
• 
In Europe, the mean daily production losses in Malaga (Spain) caused by the accu-
mulation of dust deposited on the surface of a PV module was around 4.4%, and in 
long dry periods of dust accumulation this value was higher than 20% [13]. 
• 
In Belgium, the power loss was between 3% and 4% in a period of 5 weeks [14]. 
• 
In Crete, the annual soiling losses were estimated to be 5.86% [15]. 
• 
In the countryside of Southern Italy, 6.9% and 1.1% monthly power losses were found 
for a plant built on sandy soil and a plant built on more compact soil, respectively [16]. 
• 
In Kuwait, soiling losses amounted to 45.8% over a three month period without clean-
ing [17]. 
The dust deposited on PV modules is detrimental in most places around the world, especially 
in arid areas [18]. In addition, regional or even local circumstances may have negative – but 
sometimes positive – side effects. For example, in deserts near the ocean, such as the Ata-
cama Desert, a dense fog often appears in the morning. This fog reduces the direct component 
of solar radiation and supports adhesion based on the hygroscopic property of dust to attract 
humidity [8], [19], [20]. 
Arid areas with windy and dusty environments may intensify soiling. For example, studies have 
shown that for arid regions, a shorter time can lead to the same performance reduction gener-
ated after months in regions with more temperate and tropical climates. In semiarid and arid 
desert regions, rainfall is scarce so there is no natural cleaning of the modules [12]. 
On a global scale, losses from soiling do present a persistent problem to PV systems, with 
energy and monetary losses by far outplaying the breakthroughs in novel cell designs and 
efficiency world records. 

<<<PAGE 18>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
18 
In their models of solar power generation efficiency, Li et al. [21] combined PV performance 
modelling with long-term satellite-observation-constrained surface irradiance, aerosol deposi-
tion and precipitation rates. Their models provide a good impression of the global impact of 
these effects on PV generation. Figure 5 visualises the average reduction of the PV capacity 
factor (CF) due to atmospheric aerosols and soiling. The PV capacity factor is defined as “the 
actual annual generation divided by the total generation that would occur if the PV panels 
generated electricity at the nameplate capacity all year round” [21]. 
 
Figure 5: Average reduction of PV CFs due to aerosols, 2003–2014. Inset (a) shows the 
combined effect of atmospheric aerosols and soiling (resulting from aerosol deposition 
on PV panels). Insets (b) and (c) show the effects due to atmospheric aerosols alone (b) 
and soiling alone (c). It can be noted that the effect due to atmospheric aerosol attenu-
ation is much less than the effect of soiling [21]. 
These studies show that it is worthwhile to prevent or mitigate soiling, which requires more 
accurate modelling, which is currently being developed by different researchers (Chapter 4.1 
“Soiling Models”). Besides modelling efforts, anti-soiling techniques have been developed, in-
cluding self-cleaning glazing products and anti-soiling photocatalytic coatings, in the hope of 
finding the “holy grail of soiling mitigation” (Chapter 6.1.2). The market for washing and clean-
ing devices is ever growing, with a strong tendency towards fully robotic dry cleaning, espe-
cially in regions with water scarcity and high ambient temperatures, as discussed in Chapter 
6.2.1. 

<<<PAGE 19>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
19 
In August 2021, the IPCC “Climate Change Report 2021” [22] was published, with summaries 
of human-driven contributions to agricultural and ecological droughts. Figure 6 visualises the 
increase in drought events for many regions of the world, which will also further contribute to 
soiling increases. 
 
 
Figure 6: Observed changes in global droughts and human contribution, IPCC report 
2021 [22]. 
 
A phenomenologically different accumulation than dust – snow and ice – leads to similar con-
sequences in terms of performance losses. However, snow and ice require different modelling, 
mitigation and system designs that also come with high impacts on component reliability 
caused by mechanical load stresses. Chapter 7 (Snow Shading of Photovoltaic Systems) pro-
vides a summary of current snow research in the photovoltaic domain, complemented by case 
studies from Canada. 

<<<PAGE 20>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
20 
 PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PRINCIPLES OF SOILING 
2.1 Physical and Chemical Nature of Dust 
Extensive reviews and scientific papers have presented the physical and chemical properties 
of dust in urban and desert areas and its impact on PV power plants [12], [23], [24]. This section 
discusses the physical and chemical nature of dust particles, their morphology, chemistry, and 
composition. We will focus mainly on desert areas due to the high irradiance levels and growth 
of PV plants in these areas. 
2.1.1 Particle Size 
Dust particle size is a fundamental parameter in deposition mechanisms of soiling affecting PV 
power plants. Particle sizes may vary over several orders of magnitude, as shown in Figure 1. 
Particle size also varies from location to location. Several studies have reviewed the size of 
dust particles for different PV installations. Since dust particle size is related to soil properties, 
several studies are found in diverse disciplines (not only on PV), where important information 
about the particle size can be found. 
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) is normally used for characterizing particle size above 
0.2 µm [25]. Lawrence and Neff [26] present a particle size classification, where particles are 
defined as clay (<2 µm), fine silt (2–20 µm), coarse silt (20– 50 µm), fine sand (50–125 µm), 
and medium sand (125–250 µm). But not all particles contribute to soiling, since inertia is a 
significant limitation for particles bigger than 500 µm, and therefore these larger particles gen-
erally do not rise and are less affected by wind [27]. 
Since the mechanism of deposition of dust particles depends mostly on particle size, Mohan 
[25] has reviewed the influence of size on the deposition of dust particles and found that large 
particles (>150 µm) remain airborne for a very short time. Gravity has a higher impact on large 
particles (>10 µm) because smaller particles (<5 µm) are more affected by air turbulence. The 
smallest particles (< 1 µm), meanwhile, are easily removed by rain and do not deposit [25]. 
The silt size particles in the range of 2 µm to 63 µm are the predominant contributors to soiling 
in arid and semi-arid climates, although bigger particles can also be lifted due to higher winds 
[23]. From analysis performed in dust collected from several sites in the Atacama Desert, Chile, 
98% of all particles are smaller than 50 μm [28], with an average shape factor between 1.2 
and 1.5. Silt size particles are the predominant category for both coastal desert and inland 
desert locations [29]. Similarly, in Qatar the predominant size for dust present on PV modules 
was between 10 and 30 µm [30]. 
Elsewhere, it has been concluded that finer particles affect PV efficiency more considerably 
than coarser particles [31], and that up to 33% reduction in current has been predicted for a 
dust concentration of 4.25 mg/cm2 [18]. Therefore, it is difficult to make conclusions about the 
size of dust particles that most affect PV performance. We have shown that many natural 
parameters affect the particle size range, and their physical properties are influenced by loca-
tion, and even human influence, since the published results also depend on the capture meth-
odology, accumulation surface (glass), distance to the source, etc. On PV there is no solution 
yet other than mitigation, including manual, semi-automatic, or automatic-cleaning. 
Chemical Composition 
Utility scale and small PV installations experience soiling around the globe due to natural 
sources (e.g., deserts) or due to anthropogenic activities such as mining, industry, agriculture, 

<<<PAGE 21>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
21 
etc. Thus, the chemical nature and size of aeolian dust strongly varies depending on the loca-
tion of the PV array and on natural parameters such as the source of dust, the wind, gravita-
tional effects, etc. as shown in Figure 1. Particles from industrial sources may include concrete, 
fibreglass, carbon fibres, and brick, among other elements coming from construction sources. 
Natural sources may include pollen, bacteria, volcanic emissions, and much more. Urban 
sources may include carbon, oil smoke, diesel engine exhaust, and other pollutants. The pol-
lution coming from contamination sources is a significant factor influencing the amount of soil-
ing and the effort needed for cleaning PV assets [32], [33]. 
In order to understand the chemical nature of dust, one needs to consider that sand may come 
from different sources and locations due to wind transport that can vary in scale from local 
(hundred metres) to global (thousands of kilometres) [34]. One way to ensure an accurate 
analysis is to collect dust samples and analyse them following a standardized protocol. This 
information could be used to assess the cleaning procedure of PV plants in the O&M plan, to 
understand the impact of dust on the degradation process of the PV panels, and, most im-
portantly, to assess output power losses. 
Many studies examine the various phenomena that influence the rearrangement, aggregate 
formation, and accumulation of dust. However, the chemical aspect is rarely discussed despite 
being the root cause of soiling. 
Later sections of this chapter describe the caking phenomena. In short, interstitial compounds 
in the form of platelets fill the spaces between particles and the glass surface (Figure 9). Ad-
ditional details may be found in the Appendix. In one case from the Atacama Desert [35], these 
platelets were Kaolinite minerals. However, the chemical formation process Al2Si2O5(OH)4 of 
this mineral was not explained. 
Gypsum CaSO4(H2O)2 and Palygorskite (Mg,Al)2Si4O10(OH)(H2O)4 also form strong crystalized 
bridges. This agglomeration phenomena is called cementation. But the formation of this min-
eral or their interactions with some elements in the surface of the glass is not explained in 
detail. The aim of this chapter is not to list every possible chemical formula and equation, but 
to provide an overview of the main chemical factors that induce the accumulation of dust and 
increase the difficulty of cleaning it. 
Later sections also highlight the predominant role of water in the soiling process. In order to 
understand its effects, we must first consider two chemical properties: solubility and hygrosco-
picity. Solubility corresponds to the ability of a material to attract and retain water molecules 
from the surrounding medium. Hygroscopic behaviour manifests through either adsorption, 
i.e., attraction and retention of water molecules on the surface, or absorption, i.e., penetration 
inside the material pores. As a rule, part of the dust found on PV modules is made of salts, 
which indicates ionic compounds. Many of those ionic compounds are metastable and exhibit 
significant solubility in water. Once in solution, they dissociate into anionic and cationic com-
ponents. Those ionic components or elements will interact with each other to form new insol-
uble compounds, thus causing setting and hardening of the material. 
Therefore, this solubility characteristic is a chemical factor. Appendix 1 summarizes some min-
eral families with high levels of solubility, or which are highly hygroscopic. 
Mineral Identification 
Dust mineralogy composition can vary greatly by geographical location. Fine particles of min-
erals can travel on the wind at the troposphere level over very long distances. For instance, 
the “El Niño” climatic phenomenon causes the finest mineral particles to be raised from the 
Sahara Desert and travel over the Atlantic Ocean, aggregating with organic particles and then 

<<<PAGE 22>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
22 
falling on the South American continent, thus contributing to the fertilization of the Amazon 
Rainforest. But the local situation can also influence this mineral composition; urban-industrial 
pollution, road traffic, mining or construction sites, or intensive agriculture generate airborne 
particles, the heaviest of which travel only a few meters or kilometres. Analysing the composi-
tion of airborne dust is complex and time-consuming. The simplifying assumption, accepted by 
the scientific community, is that this composition is strongly linked to the ground dust compo-
sition. Based on that assumption, the large investigation of Engelbrecht et al. [36], who col-
lected and analysed dust from over 60 different ground sites throughout the world, provides a 
good overview of expected mineral compositions. 
Carbonates 
The survey by Engelbrecht et al. shows that 62% of global airborne mineral dust mass is emit-
ted from North Africa, while 15% comes from Asia and 11% from the Arabian Peninsula. 
In the Atacama Desert, for example, the mineral compositions of the dust collected from the 
ground and module glass contained diverse minerals, such as albite (NaAlSi3O8), anorthite 
(CaAl2SiO8), calcite (CaCO3), cristobalite (SiO2), gypsum (CaSO4·2H2O), halite (NaCl), quartz 
(SiO2), muscovite KAl2(AlSi3O10)(OH)2 and orthoclase (KAlSi3O8) [28]. Another study per-
formed at the same site found that the collected dust was formed by minerals such as quartz 
(SiO2), sulfates of gypsum/bassanite (CaSO4 ·2H2O / 2CaSO4 ·H2O), albite/feldspars, and very 
small amounts of muscovite, amphibole, chlorite, hematite, and clinochlore [23]. In Yungay, 
near the ATAMOSTEC installations (a site in the Atacama Desert), another study found that 
dust contains mainly quartz, clay (illite, montmorillonite), gypsum, anhydrite, plagioclase, cal-
cite, orthoclase, biotite, and amphibole [36]. 
Dust on Glass 
Dust solutions attack the glass surface while altering the surface texture and the molecular 
vibrational states in the surface region. In addition, the diffusion of potassium into the surface 
region causes surface toughening, while increasing the surface microhardness of the glass. 
The optical transmittance of the glass decreases after the removal of the mud; this reduction 
is associated with (i) mud residues that remain after cleaning the glass surface and (ii) chemical 
changes in the glass surface due to the alkali and alkaline earth hydroxide attacks. The adhe-
sion and cohesion work required to remove the mud from the glass is higher than the frictional 
work performed against the glass surface [24]. 
An overview of macroscopic, controllable and microscopic factors influencing soiling has been 
provided [23] (see Figure 7). A detailed discussion of this figure is provided in Appendix 3. 

<<<PAGE 23>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
23 
 
Figure 7: Complexity of the soiling process due to many influencing factors with varia-
tion in particle size and deposition time [23]. 
At the microscopic level, the properties of airborne dust have a significant influence. These 
properties, including size distribution, shape, and chemical and mineralogy composition, can 
vary greatly from one location to another. Soiling is mostly attributed to airborne particles with 
diameters between 2 and 63 µm, since larger particles are too heavy to be lifted and trans-
ported in air. Furthermore, it is assumed that there is a correlation between airborne size dis-
tribution and particle size distribution of dust deposited on PV modules. Depending on the 
specific location, there may be a great difference in the mineral dust composition, especially 
concerning the individual proportions of the main constituents such as quartz, calcite, dolomite, 
kaolinite or hematite. The mineralogical composition of the particles can strongly influence the 
optical behaviour and corresponding transmission losses [12], [37], [38], [39]. Furthermore, the 
light transmission losses caused by accumulated dust on glass surfaces are strongly influ-
enced by the particle size distribution, depending on the irradiance level [40]. 
2.2 Cementation, Caking, Capillary Aging 
Water is the common factor in cementation, caking, and capillary aging, which can all be the 
result of physical and chemical reactions or simply physical consequences. 
 
2.2.1 Cementation 
In high humidity conditions or below dew point conditions, cementation occurs when soluble 
fractions of the deposited dust are partly or completely dissolved by water present at the sur-
face of the PV module. Besides the dissolution of some ionic compounds like sodium chloride 
(NaCl) or minerals like gypsum (CaSO4(H20)2), this could also involve the hydrolysis of silicates 
and carbonates included in the PV module glass itself. This hydrolysis is promoted by carbonic, 
sulfuric or nitric acids, which are typically present in water films on outdoor surfaces due to 

<<<PAGE 24>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
24 
dissolution of airborne CO2, SO2 or NO2. More details on these phenomena are in various 
publications [41], [42], [43]. 
During the subsequent drying process, dissolved material precipitates, causing the formation 
of solid crystallised bridges between non-dissolved fractions or insoluble minerals and the 
glass surface, as shown in Figure 8. 
 
 
Figure 8: SEM images of particles deposited on a glass substrate in dew configuration, 
on the left low magnification, on the right high magnification. 
These solid bridges result in increased particle adhesion [23], [5], [44], [45], [46]. 
 
2.2.2 Caking 
Caking is the rearrangement, aggregation and compaction of particles that occurs when parti-
cles adhere during wet conditions, such as dew events (Figure 9). This process of particles 
caking can be illustrated by soiling processes as observed on outdoor exposed glass samples 
in the Atacama Desert in Chile [35]. 
 
 
Figure 9: SEM images of bigger dust particles, which became caked to the surface of 
the glass [23]. 

<<<PAGE 25>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
25 
 
2.2.3 Capillary Aging 
When liquid bridges between particles and surfaces are drying, the corresponding capillary 
forces press the particles against the surface, resulting in an increased effective contact area 
and adhesion [47]. Accordingly, adhesion forces – such as van der Waals forces – can signif-
icantly increase after drying. 
The process of capillary aging can occur even if there is no macroscopic dew formation de-
tected, because nano and microscopic water films can form between particles and surfaces at 
low relative humidity levels due to capillary condensation [45]. 
2.3 Dew-Driven Soiling Mechanisms 
Dew formation on PV modules is frequently reported for different desert locations (Figure 10). 
This phenomenon can be attributed to ambient high humidity but also radiative cooling of PV 
modules. This cooling is due to the high infrared emissivity of solar glass. 
 
 
Figure 10: Typical dataset for relative humidity and temperatures of PV modules, ambi-
ent as well as calculated dew point temperature over the duration of three nights in 
October 2015 at the solar test facility, Doha [23]. 
Figure 11 shows one model dataset for temperatures in the Atacama Desert, which demon-
strates that at night the front surface of PV modules cool down below ambient temperature, 
especially during clear skies. This phenomenon is described in many articles [1], [48], [49], 
[41], [23]. 

<<<PAGE 26>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
26 
 
 
Figure 11: Simulation of temperature and humidity cycle of one full day in the Atacama 
Desert. 
In Figure 11, the ambient temperature (Tamb) and the hygrometry percentage (%Hr) are the 
means of the daily measures for each hour during one year. 
The temperature on the glass of the PV module (Tglass) is calculated assuming that this tem-
perature is similar to the temperature of the cells inside the panel. 
𝑇°𝑔𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠= 𝑇°𝑎𝑚𝑏 + 𝑁𝑂𝐶𝑇−20
80
× 𝑆 
(1) 
Where: 
• 
NOCT is the Normal Operating Cell Temperature which is specified on the PV mod-
ule label. 
• 
S is the solar irradiance in the plane of array. This irradiance is the calculated mean 
of the daily irradiance for each hour during one year. 
At night, the temperature of the glass depends mainly on the radiative cooling phenomena. 
The French Research Institute CEA-INES monitors several photovoltaic installations, and it 
has been noted that on average, just after sunset, the temperature of the glass drops rapidly 
to -3°C below ambient temperature and decreases further to -7°C just before sunrise. This 
rough model could be improved by taking into account meteorological conditions, which have 
a direct impact on the clear-sky characteristics and therefore on the radiative phenomena. 
As soon as the glass temperature reaches the dew point, water condenses on it. This dew 
point can be calculated using the following Equation 2: 
𝑇𝑝 = 
𝑏( 𝑎𝑇
𝑏+ 𝑇+ 𝑙𝑛𝑅𝐻)
𝑎−( 𝑎𝑇
𝑏+ 𝑇+ 𝑙𝑛𝑅𝐻)
 
(2) 
Where: 
• 
a= 17.27, dimensionless 
• 
b= 237.7 °C 

<<<PAGE 27>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
27 
• 
RH: relative humidity in [%] 
Condensing water can increase the particle deposition rate. Furthermore, once dew is present 
on the PV module surface, the water can interact with dust particles and the glass surface, 
until it evaporates during the day when the surface temperatures of the PV modules rise to 
high levels. Besides temporarily increasing capillary forces, the water particle interaction pro-
motes different processes with permanently increased particle adhesion, such as cementation, 
particle caking, and capillary aging as described previously. 
2.4 Review of Moisture in Soiling 
As already mentioned, soiling is a complex phenomenon governed by interrelated parameters. 
Particle adhesion is mainly the result of capillarity, caking and cementation. In each of those 
processes, moisture plays a key role. Some studies have endeavoured to correlate chemical 
composition of dust particles and chemical physical adhesion mechanisms. The aim of this 
chapter is to give an overview of the different phenomena caused by moisture in the whole 
soiling process. An overview of the different adhesion forces is given in Chapter 2.5. 
• 
Gravitational force acting on a dust particle is dependent on the mass of the particle, 
which may increase because of moisture ingress. 
• 
Capillary forces occur in the presence of moisture. A thin layer of water covers the 
module surface, and the resulting capillary forces are a combination of two condi-
tions: surface tension and a difference of pressure between the air and the water sur-
rounding the particles, causing “water meniscus”. As a result, the water capillary 
forces cause particles to adhere to the module surface. 
• 
Van der Waals forces are dominant at very low relative humidity. Van der Waals 
forces arise from interatomic attraction. Thus, interatomic forces can occur between 
dust particles and the surface, leading to an increase of adhesion. The water acts as 
a physical barrier between those particles, thus decreasing or even cancelling the re-
sulting attractive forces. 
• 
Electrostatic interactions are caused mainly by collision between airborne particles. 
These provide an electric charge and thus produce electrostatic attraction or repul-
sion. Since there is less moisture vapor in the air, ESD (Electrostatic Discharge) is 
more common in environments with low relative humidity. Normally, the airborne 
moisture helps to dissipate static electricity. Water is conductive which allows electric-
ity to travel freely throughout the air and minimizes ESD build-ups. 
• 
Caking is a mechanism involving water. Water droplets that flow on the module sur-
face can drag particles and bring them together, thus forming aggregates. Small parti-
cles can also fill interstices between larger particles. This results in the formation of a 
more cohesive structure and small particles act as “sticking” components between the 
surface and larger particles. 
• 
Cementation is one of the most reported mechanisms explaining dust adhesion. 
Chemical reactions form a new compound that crystallises and covers dust particles, 
creating solid bridges between them and the surface, which drastically increases ad-
hesion. Ilse et al. [23] has analysed and identified the major role of the mineral 
palygorskite in the soiling process in Qatar. Palygorskite, which has a needle-like 
shape (Figure 12), is probably the result of a dissolution-precipitation process. 
Palygorskite first dissolves in water produced from condensation, then evaporation 
enables it to recrystallize. 
 

<<<PAGE 28>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
28 
 
 
Figure 12: Palygorskite needle structure, SEM images [50]. 
The cementation process has also been highlighted in one area of the Atacama Desert [29]. 
This study revealed particles with silica covered by particles in the form of gypsum. This en-
capsulation of particles by gypsum increases dust fixation and encourages soiling. This result 
also suggests a dissolution-recrystallization process like palygorskite, which is corroborated 
by the prismatic shape of the monoclinic gypsum. Even if the exact formation process remains 
unclear, it is obvious that moisture plays an essential role. 
 
2.5 Overview of Particle Deposition and Adhesion Forces: Van der 
Waals, Capillary, Electrostatic, and Gravitational Forces 
The rate at which dust particles accumulate on the PV surface can be considered the net result 
of the following three processes [30]: 
1. 
Deposition: particles from the atmosphere impacting the surface 
2. 
Rebound: immediately rebounding from the surface without adhering 
3. 
Resuspension: later being resuspended by wind 
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 = 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 − 𝑅𝑒𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 − 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 
(3) 
The deposition of particles is mostly controlled by gravity (sedimentation) and turbulence of 
the airflow (inertial deposition). If wind speed is above approximately 3 m/s, the particle depo-
sition rate can be adequately explained by sedimentation alone. This sedimentation process 
can be roughly modelled by the Stokes settling velocity in Equation (4: 
 
𝑣𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑠= 𝜚𝑑2𝑔/18µ 
(4) 
 
Where 
• 
ϱ: particle density 
• 
d: particle diameter 
• 
g: gravitational acceleration 
• 
µ: dynamic viscosity of air 
The deposition flux rate for each particle size category is obtained by multiplying that velocity 
by the airborne concentration of particles of that size. There is no widely used predictive model 
for the rebound of particles. Theoretically, particles are predicted to rebound from the surface 
if their kinetic energy on impact exceeds the work of adhesion between the particle and sur-
face. Therefore, the rebound fraction is expected to be greater for large particles, high wind 
speed, and low humidity. For resuspension (particle removal by wind), three different mecha-
nisms are considered: rolling, sliding and direct lift-off. 
Typical particle adhesion forces include those listed below in decreasing order of importance: 

<<<PAGE 29>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
29 
• 
Capillary forces for hydrophilic (contact angle = 0°) and hydrophobic (contact angle > 
150°) glass surface properties; 
• 
Van der Waals forces for a smooth and a rough glass surface; 
• 
Gravity (weight of sphere); 
• 
Electrostatic forces assuming mean particle charging at the Boltzmann equilibrium. 
In addition, possible detachment modes in case of strong wind (>10m/s or 36 km/h) include: 
• 
Rolling 
• 
Sliding 
• 
Lift off 
Surprisingly, in comparison with capillary and van der Waals adhesion forces, gravity and elec-
trostatic forces can be omitted. We can also conclude that the sliding and rolling forces in-
crease considerably depending on the particle size. The lifting force is negligible when particles 
have a diameter less than 50 µm. 
 
 
Figure 13: a) Schematic illustration and simulation of particle adhesion and removal for 
a SiO2 sphere on solar glass. b) Adhesion forces and removal forces (dashed lines) are 
shown as a function of particle diameter [23]. 
The size scale of roughness is very important: asperities should be significantly smaller than 
particle diameter (about three orders of magnitude) to reduce adhesion. Particles may become 
trapped on surfaces whose surface roughness is comparable to particle size. 
In wet environments, van der Waals forces are considerably decreased because of the reduc-
tion of the Hamaker constant by the interstitial water. 

<<<PAGE 30>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
30 
Solid bridge bonds, including chemical bonds as well as entanglements such as mechanical 
interlocking, are excluded in the comparison of adhesion forces (Figure 13) but can be as-
sumed to be orders of magnitude higher than the given values for capillary and van der Waals 
forces [45]. These solid bridge bonds play an essential role in the phenomenon of cementation, 
which involves rather complex chemical interactions. 
The simulated force ranges strongly support the assertion that particles smaller than 10 µm 
are rarely removed by wind [47]. 

<<<PAGE 31>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
31 
 SENSING SOILING AND SNOW 
Soiling is a site-specific issue that causes reversible power and energy losses to PV systems 
worldwide. If not adequately tackled, it can lead to significant missed revenues and, in the 
worst cases, even turn profits into economic losses. In contrast to irreversible PV reliability and 
performance issues, soiling can be mitigated through a number of solutions that are described 
in Chapter 6, although soiling mitigation has to be adapted to the specific conditions of each 
site, which can also change with time. 
Indeed, soiling not only varies from site to site, but can have dissimilar effects on systems that 
are located nearby and, in some circumstances, also on different parts of the same system. In 
addition, the rate of soiling and the frequency of natural cleaning events, such as rainfall, can 
change with the seasons and the years. For all these reasons, and because of the high eco-
nomic value associated with the losses, it is critical to continuously measure and monitor the 
level of soiling on a PV plant. This can be done through a range of commercially available 
solutions, and through monitoring of the output of the PV plant and how it evolves with time. 
The measurements of these soiling sensors can then be used to determine the most profitable 
time to clean (see Chapter 6.3). 
This chapter is structured as follows. First, in Chapter 3.1, the most common indexes used to 
quantify the effect of soiling on PV module performance are described. In Chapter 3.2, currently 
available soiling and snow sensors are listed. Ideally, soiling can also be extracted from per-
formance ratios, but the effects of soiling on irradiance sensors have to be estimated in this 
case, as detailed in Chapter 3.2.3. 
3.1 Soiling Metrics 
Typically, the soiling profile of a PV system can be described as an alternation of soiling dep-
osition periods and cleaning events. Soiling occurs on the surface of PV modules at rates that 
are affected by factors such as particulate matter, wind speed and relative humidity (Chapter 
2), and soiling is washed off by rain or other natural cleaning events. For this reason, soiling 
has to be described by at least two metrics: one to quantify the current losses and a second to 
describe the daily variation in losses due to soiling deposition and resuspension. While the first 
metric (commonly called the soiling ratio) assesses the current state of the system, the other 
metric (commonly called the soiling rate) can be used in combination with cleaning event pat-
terns to predict near-future losses. 
The soiling ratio is defined by the IEC-61724 standard as the ratio of the power of a PV array 
in soiling conditions to the power of the same PV array in clean conditions. It has a value of 
one in conditions of no soiling and decreases while soiling accumulates, reducing the electrical 
output of the PV modules. A soiling ratio of zero occurs if soiling is blocking all light from reach-
ing the PV cell. The fractional loss due to soiling (i.e., the soiling loss, also defined as “Soiling 
Level” in the IEC-61724) can be calculated as one minus the soiling ratio. The soiling ratio has 
been used to express the daily, seasonal, or annual impact of soiling on the energy yield. Also, 
depending on the application, it has been calculated as an irradiance-weighted average to give 
higher influence to the soiling occurring during the most irradiance-intense periods. In litera-
ture, indices similar to the soiling ratio can be found, including “Cleanness Index”, “Soiling 
Factor”, or “Soiling Loss Factor.” They are all based on the same concept (i.e., comparing the 
actual and the expected output of a PV device) even though the data used for their calculation 
might differ. 

<<<PAGE 32>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
32 
The electrical impact of soiling changes with the time of the day (Figure 14) because of the 
variation in angle of incidence and the components of light [13]. The IEC-61724 standards 
recommend measuring soiling within two hours of solar noon (if the PV devices are fixed) or 
for angle of incidence <~35° (if the PV devices are tracked). Considering only the central hours 
of the day also limits the potential bias due to misalignments and to morning or evening shad-
ings [51], [52]. On the other hand, some authors have been using 24-hour data, as this ap-
proach provides a more direct measure of the impact of soiling on the PV module energy yield 
[53]. 
 
Figure 14: Time variation of the soiling ratios recorded at one-minute steps. The daily 
average values are marked by the large markers [51]. 
In most cases, the soiling ratio is approximated as the ratio of the short-circuit current of a 
soiled and reference PV device, instead of being calculated from the energy or the power 
outputs. When all cells in a PV module are uniformly soiled, the temperature-corrected short-
circuit current is proportional to the power output. However, light rain or condensation can 
cause partial cleaning of tilted modules and the accumulation of soiling at the bottom row of 
cells. In this case, soiling also affects the shape of the PV module I-V curve, reducing the short-
circuit current and the maximum power by dissimilar factors. In particular, if soiling is not dis-
tributed uniformly, the short circuit current measurements might underestimate the actual im-
pact of soiling on the PV power. This underestimation occurs when a string of soiled cells is 
opened by the bypass diode, resulting in a power loss, but not in a change of the module’s 
short-circuit current [54] as shown in Figure 15. 

<<<PAGE 33>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
33 
 
Figure 15: IV Characteristics of several soiling conditions and patterns for crystalline Si 
module [55]. (a) and (d) clean conditions; (b) and (c) “uniform” soiling conditions; (e) 
and (f) non-uniform soiling on the sides and bottom of the frame; (g) high non-uniform 
soiling at sides and corners; (h) blotch covering several cells near centre of module 
with high-level edge build up. 
The second common metric used in soiling analysis is the soiling rate, which describes the 
daily variation in soiling ratio while soiling accumulates on the PV module surface. It is ex-
pressed as %/day and conventionally reported as negative. A rate of 0%/day expresses that 
the soiling ratio is not changing and generally occurs if no soiling is depositing. The steeper 
the soiling ratio profile, the higher the absolute value of the soiling rate. Commonly, the soiling 
rate is assumed to be constant in between cleaning events, even if some authors have sug-
gested that the soiling loss profiles might follow an exponential function [56] or that they might 
be more accurately modelled through multiple linear functions. 
The most common way to calculate the soiling rate is to determine the slope of the soiling 
profile in between cleaning events and this can be done by using a least-square regression 
[57]. However, this approach has been found to be potentially biased by outliers and unac-
counted cleaning events. The Theil-Sen estimator and a bisquare weighted least square re-
gression have been employed in previous studies to overcome this issue [58], [59]. In addition, 
Deceglie et al. [58] and Besson et al. [59] have suggested calculating soiling rates only for 
periods of at least 14 days with no cleaning events, to avoid fitting trends with a limited number 
of data points. Additional metrics are available in literature as an alternative to the soiling rate, 
such as the change in cleanness index [53]. 
 
In most cases, a single soiling rate is identified for each PV site and considered constant 
throughout the year. This can be determined as the soiling rate of the longest dry period [57], 
or as the median of the slopes of all the dry periods [58]. This value can then be used, in 
combination with the rainfall or natural cleaning event patterns, to generate the soiling loss 
profile of the investigated site. Recently, the use of monthly (rather than annual) soiling rates 
or, at least, the calculation of an average annual soiling rate, weighted according to the length 
of each dry period, was suggested as a way to improve the characterization of soiling and of 
its seasonality at a site [60]. 

<<<PAGE 34>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
34 
3.2 Market Overview of Soiling and Snow Sensors 
3.2.1 Monitoring Soiling 
There are distinct seasonal variations of soiling [61], as shown in Figure 2. With this seasonal 
variation, it makes sense to monitor soiling continuously throughout the year. The location and 
environmental factors dictate how the particle concentration in the atmosphere, and hence 
dust deposition, change throughout the year. The different locations can affect the degree of 
soiling since different types of dust transmit different spectra of light [30]. The soil composition 
of the location contributes to the type of dust on the surface of the module and hence the light 
transmission spectrum. Some parts of the world will have greater average soiling rates than 
other regions. This is largely due to prevailing weather conditions [62], with more arid areas 
likely to have higher soiling rates. 
One of the key messages from an investigation of the literature is that soiling rates can vary 
greatly from location to location as well as seasonally. For example, at two locations in the US, 
soiling rates can be as high as 11.5% per month in heavy agricultural areas [63]. There is also 
a link with human activity, with the soiling rates in agricultural areas being significantly higher 
than in natural deserts. 
Table 1: Soiling rates per month (%/Month) [63]. 
Region Type 
Winter 
Spring 
Summer 
Autumn 
Natural Desert 
0-1.2 
0.8-2.0 
0.9-1.1 
0-1.0 
Dry Agricultural 
0.3-3.6 
1.3-5.5 
2.2-10.9 
0-11.5 
 
Most soiling studies cover fairly short-term periods of days to a few years [64]. However, these 
data indicate that there is seasonal variation in the soiling of PV modules. When predicting 
soiling rates, it needs to be noted that yearly, or even monthly, average soiling data may not 
be sufficient for accuracy. To further complicate matters, soiling rates can be uneven within an 
array [64], or even on an individual module. For example, modules on upper racks tend to 
exhibit more soiling on average, as lower modules get rain runoff from the modules on the 
upper racks. The direction of the wind can directly impact the pattern of soiling [30] as shown 
by the uneven soiling in Figure 16, which is from the Atacama desert in Chile and demonstrates 
the effect of a dominant wind direction. 

<<<PAGE 35>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
35 
 
 
Figure 16: Soiling pattern demonstrating dominant wind direction. 
Other studies have also documented these uneven soiling rates across larger PV power plants. 
The relative power reduction in one plant varies from 0.89 to 0.95 [51]. The soiling deposition 
rates within different locations of the same site can vary in between 1.5x and 2x, depending 
on the prevailing winds and the distribution of dust sources [4]. 
 
Figure 17: Data showing uneven power reduction across a large PV plant [51]. 
With uneven distribution across a PV plant, it is recommended to have several soiling stations 
distributed around the site to give accurate results. The IEC 61724-1 standard recommends 
more than one soiling sensor for any PV site of capacity larger than five MW and with expected 
yearly losses of more than two percent. The data from soiling stations can be mapped and 
spatially averaged to provide a metric for the site, which can then be used to predict future 
soiling rates or inform the operator of the best time to clean the PV system. 

<<<PAGE 36>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
36 
3.2.2 Technologies for Sensing Soiling 
 
Soiling sensors are devices specifically designed to return a soiling loss measurement. The 
currently available soiling sensing methods can be divided into electrical techniques, which 
measure the modules’ current or power, and optical techniques examining reflectance or trans-
mittance losses due to accumulated dust on the sensor surface. 
As described before, soiling quantification is based on a comparison of the electrical outputs 
in soiled and clean conditions. Electrical methods achieve that by measuring the current or 
power outputs from two side-by-side PV devices, where one is regularly cleaned and the other 
is allowed to soil normally. As shown in Table 2, non-exhaustive examples of manufacturers 
are Atonometrics, Campbell Scientific or NRG Systems. Electrical configurations can consist 
of two reference cells, two modules, or a cell-module combination. The identical reference cell 
method is relatively low cost since racking requirements are minimal. However, reference cells 
may not soil in the same way as modules since the cover glass may be different. For example, 
it was shown in a recent study that textured cover glass soiled up to 7% more than regular 
glass [65]. By contrast, some antireflection coatings may reduce soiling by as much as 60% 
depending on geographic conditions [66]. Furthermore, a soiled reference cell will not capture 
the non-uniform distribution that can develop on module surfaces. Alternatively, a soiling sys-
tem using the module-module configuration accounts for non-uniform soiling but incurs higher 
maintenance costs since one module must be cleaned regularly, either with automated meth-
ods or by on-site personnel. By contrast, a soiling system using a cell-module configuration 
allows simple automated cleaning of the reference cell with the benefit of having a module that 
takes into account non-uniform soiling and is representative of the whole array. 
The reference device is preferably cleaned every morning, as most of the soiling deposition is 
found to occur at night [23]. However, in real cases the reference device is often cleaned 
weekly, if cleaning is not fully automatic. When the costs and the benefits of a soiling sensor’s 
cleaning schedule is assessed, it should be considered that an inadequate cleaning frequency 
can produce a significant underestimation of the soiling ratio [67]. 
Whether the soiling configuration is cell-cell, module-module, or cell-module, another important 
consideration is whether to measure only the short-circuit current or also the power. Indeed, 
as aforementioned, the non-uniform distribution can cause a disproportionate power loss rela-
tive to the change in short-circuit current, reduce the fill factor and even potentially lead to hot-
spots that permanently damage the PV cells [64], [68]. Thus, soiling stations based on electri-
cal measurement should ideally collect both short-circuit current and power data in order to 
address the complexities of non-uniform soiling. 
While some soiling systems differ in terms of using modules or reference cells, the general 
method of short-circuit current measurement is the same: a temperature-compensated short-
circuit current with back-of-module temperature measurements are used to determine the ef-
fective irradiance using the methods outlined in IEC 60891 edition 2 [69]. In order to minimize 
degradation, the clean and soiled PV devices may be kept at open-circuit between measure-
ments. Usually, computations are only performed for the central hours of the day during clear-
sky conditions and when effective irradiance is greater than 500 W/m2. This minimizes the 
effects of zenith angle, air mass, and spectral differences. Other filtering techniques involve 
the exclusion of data when the rate of change of short-circuit current is high due to passing 
clouds [70]. The Soiling Ratio is calculated using the short-circuit currents of the clean, 𝐼𝑠𝑐1, 
and soiled, 𝐼𝑠𝑐2, devices with respective short-circuit current temperature coefficients given by 
𝛼1 and 𝛼2. The subscript M indicates measurements made at the time of soiling, and M' refers 
to measurements made at calibration [71]. 

<<<PAGE 37>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
37 
𝑆𝑅=
𝐼𝑠𝑐2,𝑀(1 −𝛼2(𝑇2,𝑀−𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓))
𝐼𝑠𝑐1,𝑀(1 −𝛼1(𝑇1,𝑀−𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓))
∙
𝐼𝑠𝑐1,𝑀′ (1 −𝛼1(𝑇1,𝑀′ −𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓))
𝐼𝑠𝑐2,𝑀′ (1 −𝛼2(𝑇2,𝑀′ −𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓))
 
(5) 
 
Where: 
• 
SR : Spectral Response 
• 
ISC1,M : Short Circuit clean device, time of soiling 
• 
ISC2,M : Short Circuit soiled device, time of soiling 
• 
ISC1,M’ : Short Circuit clean device, time of calibration 
• 
ISC2,M’ : Short Circuit soiled device, time of calibration 
• 
α: Temperature coefficient 
• 
T : corresponding temperatures, Tref typically 25°C 
 
A similar equation can be written for the soiling ratio using the power temperature coefficient 
and substituting short-circuit current with power output from clean and soiled devices. 
Furthermore, in order to minimize degradation between soiling measurements, the load to 
which a module is connected can have important non-linear effects on the degradation rate 
and is technology specific. Multi and mono-crystalline silicon modules show reduced degrada-
tion rates under open-circuit compared to grid-connected operation at maximum power point 
[72]. By contrast, several studies reveal that thin film technologies such as a-Si:H [73] and 
CdTe [74] show higher degradation rates under open-circuit relative to grid-connected condi-
tions. 
In contrast to electrical measurements, dust sensors employing optical methods are provided 
by Kipp and Zonen and Atonometrics. Kipp and Zonen's Dust IQ sensor uses a pulsed blue 
LED to measure the scattered light reflected from dust particles. The transmission loss is con-
verted into an equivalent loss in short-circuit current and power. However, dust scattering prop-
erties vary with test location. The Dust IQ is initially calibrated with Arizona quartz dust but 
should be recalibrated for site-specific soiling conditions by allowing local dust to accumulate 
until the transmission loss is between 5 to 10%. In addition to the photodiode, Dust IQ calibra-
tion involves measuring the short-circuit current of an internal silicon cell under clean and soiled 
conditions within two hours of solar noon [75]. An alternate optical method is provided by Aton-
ometrics' Mars Soiling Sensor. The Mars device uses a sensor and image processing software 
to calculate transmission loss due to soiling. The sensor is located behind a diffuser, and the 
cover window has black and white marks on the inside surface for self-calibration. An overview 
of suppliers offering soiling systems is given in Table 2. 

<<<PAGE 38>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
38 
Table 2: A partial list showing several products available for quantifying losses due to 
soiling. Manufacturers are in alphabetical order. All equipment prices in this report are 
estimates from the year 2019. The manufacturer should be contacted for exact costs. 
Soiling Sensors 
Manufacturer 
Atonometrics 
Atonometrics 
Campbell 
Scientific 
Kipp and 
Zonen 
NRG Sys-
tems 
Model name 
Soiling Meas-
urement Sys-
tem 
Mars Soiling 
Sensor 
CR-PVS1 
Dust IQ 
Soiling Meas-
urement Kit 
Method 
Short-circuit 
current and 
power 
Optical (im-
age pro-
cessing cam-
era) 
Short-circuit 
current 
Optical 
(LED) 
Short-circuit 
current 
Module power 
range 
Up to 450 W 
Not applica-
ble 
Up to 300 
W 
Not appli-
cable 
3 panels of 
15 W each 
Power supply 
10 to 30 VDC 
or 100 to 240 
VAC 
10 to 30 
VDC 
16 to 32 
VDC 
12 to 30 
VDC 
5 to 15 VDC 
Output options 
Ethernet 
RS-485, 
Ethernet 
RS-232 
RS-485 
Available 
upon request 
Approximate 
Cost: Euro / 
USD 
€ 6078 / 
$ 6900 
€ 2600 / 
$2950 
€ 2334 / 
$ 2649 
€ 3807 / 
$ 4320 
Available 
upon request 
 
In terms of measurement accuracy, more study is needed to quantify measurement uncertainty 
of different soiling sensing products. In particular, it would be beneficial if soiling sensing prod-
ucts were referenced to the International Guidelines of Uncertainty in Measurement with refer-
ence to standard and expanded uncertainties for different devices. For the short-circuit current 
soiling ratio, both the clean and soiled cells or modules can be simultaneously calibrated with 
a reference PV device. Soiling ratio accuracy is thus dependent only on uncertainties in short-
circuit current, temperature (with a difference between back-of-module and cell) and short-
circuit current temperature coefficient. In addition to these uncertainties, clean and soiled mod-
ules may not be exactly co-planar, leading to tilt and azimuth angular alignment errors. The 
azimuth and tilt misalignment can be minimized by making measurements within a few hours 
of solar noon when angle of incidence is small. Furthermore, azimuth misalignment can be 
minimized by averaging data shortly before and after solar noon, taking advantage of the sign 
change in soiling ratio that occurs at noon. In addition, field-based calibrations should be made 
under realistic operating temperatures to minimize the contribution of uncertainty from short-
circuit current temperature coefficients. It has been shown [71] that with careful calibration and 
filtering of data, short-circuit current soiling ratio measurements can have an uncertainty of 
approximately ± 1%. The most accurate measurements (1 to 2% uncertainty) are possible 
using the cell-module or module-module configuration when measuring power. Short-circuit 
current measurements in cell-module or module-module configuration are less accurate 
(around 3 to 5%) since they do not take into account non-uniform soiling. The least accurate 
methods (uncertainty around 4 to 7%) are short-circuit current cell-cell configuration and optical 
methods since they may use different cover glass compared to the array and will not capture 

<<<PAGE 39>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
39 
non-uniform soiling. Nevertheless, cell-cell and optical methods are the least costly, allow for 
simple installation and multiple measurement points, and have little or no maintenance costs. 
However, it must be emphasized that the magnitude of the uncertainties for different soiling 
sensors described in this report are estimates [76] and that also the reference device’s clean-
ing interval can bias the soiling measurement [67]. Additional studies are needed to reinforce 
these figures. 
 
 
3.2.3 Soiling Characteristics of Irradiance Sensors 
Irradiance sensors are subject to soiling. In this section, the soiling rates of standard pyranom-
eters with a characteristic dome shape are compared to soiling rates of reference cells with a 
characteristic flat plate surface. Regardless of sensor type, the international standard 
IEC61724 recommends irradiance sensors be cleaned weekly [77]. The temperature-corrected 
Performance Ratio can provide a good estimate of soiling rates and soiling loss during dry 
seasons, so long as the POA irradiance sensor is cleaned and maintained. The absolute un-
certainty of the soiling sensor is irrelevant, so long as the short-term stability of the irradiance 
sensor is adequate. 
Soiling losses depend on dust composition, local climate conditions, and exposure time. In 
addition, soiling losses also depend on tilt angle [78], [79]. Soiling losses typically decrease as 
tilt angles increase for a given location because the effective area of the surface decreases 
relative to the zenith angle and gravitational forces, at least in areas where the wind does not 
play a significant role in removing dust. The reduction in effective surface area is analogous to 
the cosine loss on irradiance due to the angle of incidence, which quantifies the decrease in 
the effective area of the modules as seen by the direct beam of sunlight. 
The tilt angle should also influence soiling rates on irradiance sensors is some way. There are 
two basic surface geometries for irradiance sensors. Reference cells typically consist of silicon 
devices packaged under flat plate glass, and pyranometers typically consist of thermopile sen-
sors packaged under single or double domed glass. The soiling rates for reference cells should 
be similar to soiling rates on other glass surfaces, including PV modules, assuming the glass 
coatings are also similar. However, tilt angle should influence the soiling rates on pyranometers 
differently given the dome shape. The dome shape presents the smallest possible horizontal 
surface at every tilt angle relative to the force of gravity, so theoretically soiling rates should be 
smaller on pyranometers. 
Two published papers support lower soiling rates on pyranometers compared to flat plate de-
vices. In one study conducted in the Western United States, soiling rates on pyranometers 
measured 50% less than soiling rates on modules [80]. While this is not a direct comparison 
between pyranometers and reference cells, the soiling rates on flat plate reference cells should 
be similar to soiling rates on the modules, given similar surface coatings and metrics. Soiling 
rates will also depend on the choice of metric, i.e., Isc versus Pmp, so a direct comparison of 
reference cells and pyranometers should be based on the Isc of the reference cell. In another 
paper, the soiling loss on a pyranometer was shown to be less than the soiling loss on a DNI 
pyrheliometer [81]. Once again, this is not a direct comparison of the two sensor types, but the 
pyrheliometer is also a flat plate surface device, albeit protected somewhat by a shield to limit 
the field of view. 
The outdoor testing facility on the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR ) cam-
pus in South Africa maintains both silicon reference cells and pyranometers to monitor 

<<<PAGE 40>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
40 
irradiance, so a more direct comparison can be evaluated. The energy yield test bed is one of 
three different testing platforms available for research on modules and systems. The energy 
yield test bed connects individual modules to electronic loads with grid connection to recover 
the energy in between regularly scheduled I-V curves. The test bed is equipped with a silicon 
reference cell in the plane of array (due north, 25° tilt), a pyranometer in the plane of array, 
and a second pyranometer for albedo. The irradiance sensors are cleaned in the morning with 
a dry cloth to remove the dust, roughly once per week. 
Figure 18 shows the difference in daily insolation as measured by a pyranometer and a silicon 
reference before and after a weekly clean cell over 11 weeks during the dry season in 2019, 
from 20 June to 04 October. The y-axis shows the block-centred difference in daily insolation 
measurements between the pyranometer and the silicon reference cell on the day before the 
clean and the day of the clean, blocked by week to remove the variability in daily insolation, 
which ranged from 5500-7500 Wh/m²/day during this period. After cleaning, the distribution of 
the differences in daily insolation as measured by the two sensors was significantly less than 
the day before the cleaning (two-tailed p-value – 0.01). The reduction in the difference can be 
attributed to the cleaning, and likely explained by the increased soiling loss on the reference 
cell (flat plate) compared to the pyranometer (domed). The dataset does not lend itself to fur-
ther analysis since the cleaning was done in the early morning when the irradiance was chang-
ing rapidly, nor was the exact minute of cleaning recorded. The difference of the differences 
measured 42 Wh/m², or 0.6% of the average daily insolation of 6520 Wh/m²/day. The 95% 
confidence interval for the difference was 10-74 Wh/m²/day, or 0.2-1.1%. This 0.6% per week 
is a reasonable approximation of the additional soiling rate on the silicon reference cell (flat 
plate) compared to the pyranometer (dome-shaped) during this period. 
 
 
 
Figure 18: Analysis of variance (ANOVA) showing the difference in daily insolation as 
measured by a flat-plate reference cell and a pyranometer before and after cleaning. 
In conclusion, soiling rates are likely lower on pyranometers compared to flat plate reference 
cells. However, irradiance sensors should be cleaned weekly to minimize the impact of soiling 
on ground-based irradiance measurement, as per the IEC 61724 standard. 

<<<PAGE 41>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
41 
 SOILING AND SNOW MODELS 
4.1 Soiling Models 
Along with monitoring, it is also important to understand in advance the potential impact of 
soiling on the energy yield and on the O&M costs of a proposed PV plant. This can be accom-
plished by direct measurement of soiling levels at the site prior to installation and operation. 
This measurement would require setting up a soiling sensor for at least a year. Although, if the 
soiling level could be determined from other parameters whose values were already available, 
it would be possible to assess the energy and economic impact of soiling while selecting the 
site for a new PV installation. 
Several weather and pollution factors influence soiling deposition and cleaning. In addition, 
inherent macroscale factors (e.g., Land use/Land Cover, NDVI, agricultural activity, prevailing 
soil type, etc.) can also influence the soiling profile. Out of all these parameters, the most 
prominent factors (or at least the most recurring ones in this research area) are the particle 
mass concentrations PM10 and PM2.5, the wind speed and direction, the frequency of wind 
gusts, the relative humidity, and the rain intensity and frequency [1]. PM10 and PM2.5 repre-
sent the concentration, in mass per m3 of air, of suspended particles of sizes ≤ 10 µm and ≤ 
2.5 µm, respectively, with PM2.5 being a subset of PM10. 
There are extensive literature sources available that describe efforts to model the deposition 
of suspended particulate matters on PV and CSP. A bibliometric survey done on Web of Sci-
ence in 2019 gave a dedicated overview over research areas, outstanding publications, and 
their authors as well as their subdomain, as can be seen in Figure 19. The present chapter 
summarises the development and applications of models to predict the deposition of soiling 
without the need of specific soiling data or of PV performance from the site of interest. 
A non-exhaustive overview of the currently available models is reported in the following sub-
sections. The models have been classified into four categories: linear regression models, semi-
physical models, artificial intelligence models and geospatial models. Subchapters 4.1.1 to 
4.1.4 each focus on a different category. A summary of the existing models and of the current 
challenges are reported in subchapter 4.1.5. 
 

<<<PAGE 42>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
42 
 
Figure 19: Bibliometric analysis [82] of soiling model literature in Web of Science. 
4.1.1 Linear Regression Models 
The soiling profile can be modelled through a linear regression of one or more environmental 
parameters. The spatial resolution of the models ranges from single PV systems based on 
local meteorological conditions like wind direction and wind speed, relative humidity, and dep-
osition velocities to small scale resolutions like particulate matter densities derived from satel-
lites. 
In the simplest approaches, an electrical or transmittance loss is estimated from exclusively 
the suspended particle concentration. Rainfalls are generally assumed to restore the soiling 
loss to 0% (i.e., soiling ratio to one). The method proposed by Boyle [83] uses total suspended 
particle concentration (TSP) to estimate the transmittance loss (∆𝜏, expressed in %) on a PV 
glass after i days of outdoor exposure: 
 
∆𝜏(𝑖) = 0.005 ∙𝑇𝑆𝑃̅̅̅̅̅ ∙𝑖+ 0.22 
(6) 
Where: 
• 
𝑇𝑆𝑃̅̅̅̅̅ represents the average concentration of particles of size ≤ 100 µm 
• 
i = days of outdoor exposure 
The most common approach is multi-variate regression, where soiling is modelled through a 
large number of variables. Toth [84] calculates the electrical loss due to soiling (SL) only from 
PM10 and PM2.5: 
𝑆𝑅= 𝐴10−2.5 ∙𝐶10−2.5 + 𝐴2.5 ∙𝐶2.5 
(7) 

<<<PAGE 43>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
43 
 
Where: 
• 
𝐶10−2.5 is the cumulative sum of coarse particles (calculated as difference between 
PM10 and PM2.5) since the last day of rainfall 
• 
C25 is the cumulative sum of PM2.5 since the first day of data collection and 
• 
A10-2.5 and A2.5 are constant conversion factors that have to be determined. These two 
factors are specific to the instrument used for the PM monitoring, and are also ex-
pected to vary depending on the site’s configuration and local conditions. 
 
Compared to other approaches, categorized as Semi-Physical models, the factors are deter-
mined through the fitting of the data, with no research for physical meaning. 
In other cases, multi-variate regression is employed to take into account non-particulate matter 
related variables. For example, Guo [85] proposed a linear equation 
𝑆𝑅= 𝑎+ 𝑏∗𝑃𝑀10 + 𝑐∗𝑊𝑆+ 𝑑∗𝑅𝐻 
(8) 
Where: 
• 
PM10 : Particle mass below 10 microns 
• 
WS : Wind speed 
• 
RH : Relative humidity (%) 
• 
a, b, c, d : constant parameters, whose values were determined by fitting the data 
In a later study, Javed et al. [1] tested a multi-linear approach with 10 variables in input. In 
2018, Figgis [48] described the mass of deposited soiling considering only wind speed (WS) 
and PM10: 
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛= 10.6 −4.99 ∗𝑊𝑆+ 274 ∗𝑃𝑀10 −73.4 ∗𝑊𝑆∗𝑃𝑀10
−14.9∆𝑊𝑆1ℎ𝑟 
(9) 
Where: 
• 
∆WS1hr was the difference between WS of the observation period and average WS 
of the preceding hour. 
 
In the same work, the authors also reported equations to describe the different phenomena 
that influence soiling accumulation: deposition, rebound and resuspension. 
Particle size and compositions are also known to have an impact on the soiling losses. In this 
light, Pulipaka et al. [86] used a multilinear regression to estimate the power loss from the 
particle size. 
Linear regression was also used by a NREL team [87], [3] to rank the severity of annual soiling 
losses at multiple sites in the USA. Compared to the aforementioned studies, which aimed to 
replicate daily soiling loss profiles, in this case long-term averages of the soiling losses were 
modelled. The authors compared the data of initially 20 and later 41 soiling stations with more 
than 100 micro- and macroscopic parameters describing the systems’ characteristics and the 
local environmental conditions. The investigations found that PM10, PM2.5 and rainfall statis-
tics were the only factors with significant correlations to the annualized soiling losses. How-
ever, they also showed how the data sourcing and processing could affect these correlations. 
In particular, ground-measured PM data were found to correlate better than satellite-derived 
concentrations, especially if measured within 30 to 50 km of the site. 

<<<PAGE 44>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
44 
Using a similar approach, Cordero et al. [88] found good linear correlations between the Aer-
osol Optical Depth (AOD) and the daily soiling rates measured at six locations in Chile. Even 
in this case, the ground-measured outperformed the satellite-derived data. 
In contrast to the other soiling estimation approaches, the model proposed by Kimber et al. 
[57] makes use of PV power data and rainfall information to generate the soiling loss profile. 
In this case, the value of the soiling rate of the longest dry period is determined through linear 
regression, and then the same rate is applied to any dry period in the time series, assuming 
that rainfalls completely remove soiling from the PV modules. This method requires, before its 
application, the determination of two values: the minimum cleaning threshold (minimum 
amount of rain able to wash the PV modules) and the length of the grace period (number of 
days following a rain event after which soiling resumes depositing). 
4.1.2 Semi-Physical Models 
Semi-physical models try to replicate the non-necessarily linear relations occurring in the soil-
ing process. These models generally require determining the particle deposition or settling 
velocity from local conditions, including, but not limited to, the relative humidity and wind speed 
values. 
Guo et al. [85], [53], proposed a semi-physical model calculating the soiling loss as a function 
of the daily deposition and resuspension rates. These were calculated from ambient dust con-
centration, deposition velocity (function of wind speed), wind speed and relative humidity. 
In an analysis of soiling occurring in seven cities worldwide, You et al. [89] assumed a linear 
correlation between deposited dust density (w) and the PV efficiency drop. In this case, the 
dust density (w) was calculated from the concentration of suspended particles of diameter 
within 20 µm and 50 µm (PM50-20): 
 
𝑤= 𝑁𝐷∗𝑃𝑀50−20 ∗𝑉𝑑∗10−6 
(10) 
 
Where: 
• 
ND = number of days since the last rainfall 
• 
Vd = deposition velocity, determined based on the local environmental conditions. 
 
Coello and Boyle [90] calculate the electrical soiling loss from the transmittance loss using an 
equation proposed by Hegazy [78] in 2001. In this case, the loss in transmittance is modelled 
as an error function of an exponentiation of base equal to the accumulated dust mass and of 
power < 1. In particular, the mass accumulated at a time t as: 
𝑚= (𝑣10−2.5 ∗𝑃𝑀10−2.5 + 𝑣2.5 ∗𝑃𝑀2.5) ∗𝑡∗cos (𝜗) 
(11) 
Where: 
• 
PM10-2.5 = the concentration of coarse particles, of size in between 10 µm and 2.5 µm 
• 
ϑ = tilt angle 
• 
v10-2.5, v2.5 = deposition velocities. 
 
The researchers considered three different approaches to determine the value of the deposi-
tion velocities: the deposition is considered in one approach, while fixed velocities were con-
sidered in the other two. The fixed velocities were either equal to the settling velocity or 

<<<PAGE 45>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
45 
determined from values observed at nearby stations. The best results were found for the 
static settling velocity approach. 
Bergin et al. [91] calculates the daily loss in transmittance recorded for an installation in India 
by considering the particulate matter. In this case, differently from before, the concentration 
and the absorption and scattering efficiencies of each component of the particulate matter were 
considered. 
A more complex model was proposed by Qasem et al [18], which took into account the ambient 
conditions, the system’s characteristics, the rainfall pattern and the dust’s spectral transmit-
tance to calculate the soiling loss for different PV technologies. 
4.1.3 Artificial Neural Network Models 
Compared to linear regression and semi-physical models, Artificial Neural Network (ANN) 
models do not require an understanding of the physical principles of soiling. Instead, the mod-
els iteratively self-train to identify the correct algorithms that convert the inputs into the ex-
pected output (i.e., the soiling ratio profile). The main challenge for developers is the identifi-
cation of key inputs, and of the best performing architecture (i.e., number of hidden layers and 
nodes). 
Javed et al. [1] developed an ANN model to estimate the soiling losses of a site in Qatar. The 
network was made of one hidden layer and twenty neurons, requiring an input of 10 variables 
describing the environmental conditions of the site. The model returned an R2 of 0.54 when 
compared to the measured data points. A different ANN model was proposed by Laarabi et al. 
[92] for a site in Morocco. In this case, the ANN had six inputs and one hidden layer of 35 
nodes and returned an R2 > 0.90. 
In a different approach, Pulipaka et al. [86] used an ANN model to predict the soiling losses 
based on particle composition. Shapsough et al. [93] employed ANN to estimate the impact of 
soiling using irradiance and rainfall data. 
4.1.4 Geospatial Models 
Micheli et al. [94] investigated the possibility of estimating soiling based on PV or soiling data 
from nearby locations using spatial interpolation techniques. Inverse-distance based methods 
returned the best results, with R2 > 0.7 if soiling is estimated from sites within 50 km. The 
results were even better if soiling data from only those systems with similar characteristics to 
the investigated sites were used. A similar technique was used by Gostein et al. [4], to map 
the soiling loss distribution within large utility-scale PV systems. 
It should be noted that any of the previously listed models could be used to generate soiling 
maps, so long as the input data were widely and systematically available. For example, based 
on the correlation found between daily soiling rate and AOD, Cordero et al. [88] generated a 
soiling rate map for Chile. In a different study, Li et al. [21] made use of the Bergin model [91] 
to create maps of the soiling mitigation benefits, in terms of recovered energy, for different PV 
tracking configurations. The authors used the PM type and rainfall data of the MERRA-2 rea-
nalysis dataset from 2003 and 2014. The same approach could be repeated for any of the 
previous models. 
4.1.5 Models’ Overview and Validation and Application Limits 
Table 3 shows a summary of the four model types. Most studies are based on single locations, 
whereas the soiling of multiple locations has been investigated in only a few studies. The 

<<<PAGE 46>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
46 
literature is still lacking comparative works, where different approaches are tested against soil-
ing measurements for more than one location. This makes it difficult at this time to evaluate 
the validity and robustness of each model in different soiling and environmental conditions. 
Only the study by Pelland et al. [95] compared the performance of two models in the estimation 
of the average soiling losses for 20 locations worldwide. The models were found to correlate 
poorly for sites with average losses of less than 5% but performed well for sites with higher 
soiling losses. In addition, the study showed that the results of the same model could vary if 
particulate matter from different datasets were given as inputs. 
Zhou et al. [96] employed the model proposed by Bergin et al. [91] to calculate the soiling 
losses for three locations in the USA. The authors used particulate matter data from the US 
Environmental Protection Energy’s Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) model. The re-
sults showed that CMAQ overestimated PM2.5 and underestimated the PM10 concentrations 
compared to the ground-measurements at the three investigated sites. In addition, the soiling 
losses were underestimated compared to the on-site measurements. 
In some studies, researchers have proposed and compared two models for the same location. 
This is particularly common in studies that used ANN models. Both Pulipaka et al. [86] and 
Javed et al. [1] found better results with ANN models than with multilinear models fed with the 
same number of inputs. On the other hand, Shapsough et al. [93] found no significant differ-
ence between the results of a multilinear model and an ANN model used to estimate soiling 
losses from irradiance and rainfall. In a comparison of a linear regression model and a semi-
physical model, Guo et al. [85] found that they performed similarly. 
Some studies, such as Pelland et al. [95], have also investigated the performance of the same 
model for differently sourced or differently processed inputs. In general, when available, 
ground-measured data have been found to lead to better soiling estimation than satellite-de-
rived data. Micheli et al. [3], Cordero et al. [88], and Coello et al. [90] have shown how the 
value set for the deposition velocity can affect the soiling estimation. Different results can also 
be found when soiling is extracted from PV performance data [57] because of the lack of agree-
ment on the values of factors such as grace periods and cleaning thresholds. 
For all these reasons, additional studies are still needed before a universally valid soiling model 
can be proposed. In particular, there need to be more comparative studies that identify the 
strengths and weaknesses of different approaches under various conditions of weather and 
soiling. 
Table 3 gives an overview of soiling estimation models. The models are detailed in subchap-
ters 4.1.1 to 4.1.4. The following acronyms are used: 
• 
Ambient Temperature (Ta) 
• 
Wind Speed (WS) 
• 
Wind Direction (WD) 
• 
Total Suspended Particles (TSP) 
• 
Relative Humidity (RH) 
 
 
 
 

<<<PAGE 47>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
47 
Table 3: Overview of soiling estimation models. 
Lead 
Author 
Model 
Class 
Year 
Aim 
Key 
Pa-
rameters 
Main Findings 
Reference 
Kimber 
Linear 
2006 
Extracting 
soiling 
loss 
from PV per-
formance 
data. 
PV Perfor-
mance Ra-
tio, 
Rain-
fall 
The model generates a 
soiling loss profile based 
on the rainfall pattern 
and on the soiling rate 
recorded during the long-
est dry spell. It requires 
the identification of a 
minimum cleaning tresh-
old and of the length of 
dry period. 
A. Kimber, L. Mitchell, S. Nogradi, and 
H. Wenger, ‘The Effect of Soiling on 
Large Grid-Connected Photovoltaic 
Systems in California and the South-
west Region of the United States’, in 
2006 IEEE 4th World Conference on 
Photovoltaic Energy Conference, Wai-
koloa, HI, 2006, pp. 2391–2395, doi: 
10.1109/WCPEC.2006.279690. 
Qasem 
Semi-
Physi-
cal 
2012 
Modelling 
soiling 
loss 
profile 
using 
weather data 
Ta, 
WS, 
WD, dust, 
tilt, rainfall 
A model is developed to 
estimate the dust accu-
mulation 
based 
on 
weather conditions and 
to convert this into an 
electrical loss based on 
the PV module charac-
teristics and on the dust 
spectral transmittance 
H. Qasem, T. R. Betts, and R. 
Gottschalg, Soiling Correction Model 
for Long Term Energy Prediction in 
Photovoltaic 
Modules. 
New 
York: 
IEEE, 2012. 
Boyle 
Linear 
2015 
Modelling 
a 
daily 
soiling 
profile meas-
ured at five 
U.S. 
Loca-
tions 
TSP 
A linear model is devel-
oped where the transmit-
tance loss is a function of 
TSP and of the exposure 
time. 
L. Boyle, ‘don’t soil your chances with 
solar energy:experiments of natural 
dust accumulation onsolar modules 
and the effect on lighttransmission’. . 
Guo 
Linear 
& 
Semi-
Physi-
cal 
2016 
Modelling 
a 
daily 
soiling 
profile 
of 
a 
soiling meas-
urement sys-
tem in Qatar. 
WS, 
PM10, RH 
A multi-linear 
and 
a 
semi-physical model are 
developed 
and 
com-
pared. Both models were 
found to return estima-
tion with < 16% uncer-
tainty when used to esti-
mate the daily soiling 
loss profile. 
Guo B, Javed W, Khan S, Figgis B, 
Mirza T. Models for Prediction of Soil-
ing-Caused Photovoltaic Power Output 
Degradation Based on Environmental 
Variables in Doha, Qatar. ASME 2016 
10th Int. Conf. Energy Sustain., 2016, 
p. 
1–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1115/ES2016-59390. 
Pu-
lipaka 
ANN & 
Linear 
2016 
Soiling loss is 
estimated 
from particle 
size composi-
tion 
Particle 
size 
Multi-linear 
regression 
and ANN are used to es-
timate the soiling losses 
based on particle size 
composition of the soil. 
ANN are found to per-
form better. 
S. Pulipaka, F. Mani, and R. Kumar, 
‘Modeling of soiled PV module with 
neural networks and regression using 
particle size composition’, Sol. Energy, 
vol. 123, pp. 116–126, Jan. 2016, doi: 
10.1016/j.solener.2015.11.012. 

<<<PAGE 48>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
48 
Javed 
ANN & 
Linear 
2017 
Modelling 
a 
daily 
soiling 
profile 
of 
a 
soiling meas-
urement sys-
tem in Qatar. 
Same-day 
PM10, 
WS, WD, 
Ta, 
RH, 
Previous-
day PM10, 
WS, 
RH, 
Wind Gust 
frequency 
and expo-
sure time 
A 10-input ANN model 
was able to significantly 
model the soiling loss 
trends, returning better 
results than a multilinear 
approach based on the 
same inputs. PM10, WS 
and RH were found to be 
parameters better corre-
lated with soiling. 
W. Javed, B. Guo, and B. Figgis, ‘Mod-
eling of photovoltaic soiling loss as a 
function of environmental variables’, 
Solar Energy, vol. 157, pp. 397–407, 
Nov. 
2017, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.solener.2017.08.046. 
Bergin 
Semi-
Physi-
cal 
2017 
Modelling the 
profile 
of 
a 
soiling meas-
urement in In-
dia 
PM 
com-
ponents 
concentra-
tions 
The soiling profile is 
modelled based on the 
concentration of each 
PM10 and PM2.5 com-
ponents, taking into ac-
count each specific com-
ponent’s absorption and 
scattering efficiency. 
Bergin MH, Greenwald R, Xu J, Berta 
Y, Chameides WL. Influence of aerosol 
dry deposition on photosynthetically 
active radiation available to plants: A 
case study in the Yangtze delta region 
of 
China. 
Geophys 
Res 
Lett 
2001;28:3605–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1029/2001GL013461
. 
Micheli 
Linear 
2017 
Ranking 
the 
average soil-
ing losses of 
20 soiling sta-
tion 
in 
the 
USA. 
PM10, 
PM2.5, 
Rainfall 
PM10, PM2.5 and rainfall 
are found to be the best 
soiling predictors, out of 
100+ potential variables, 
when the average losses 
of different sites are com-
pared. 
Micheli L, Muller M. An investigation of 
the key parameters for predicting PV 
soiling losses. Prog Photovoltaics Res 
Appl 
2017;25:291–307. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.2860. 
Figgis 
Linear 
2018 
Modelling 
soiling depo-
sition and re-
suspension 
WS, PM10 
Multilinear relations are 
proposed 
to 
estimate 
soiling 
accumulation, 
deposition, resuspension 
and rebound rates 
Figgis B, Guo B, Javed W, Ahzi S, Ré-
mond Y. Dominant environmental pa-
rameters for dust deposition and resus-
pension in desert climates. Aerosol Sci 
Technol 
2018;52:788–98. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02786826.2018
.1462473. 
Cordero 
Linear 
2018 
Modelling 
soiling rates in 
Chile 
AOD 
A linear correaltion is 
found in between AOD 
and 
soiling 
rates. 
Ground-measurements 
outperformed 
satellite-
derived data. 
Cordero RR, Damiani A, Laroze D, 
MacDonell S, Jorquera J, Sepúlveda E, 
et al. Effects of soiling on photovoltaic 
(PV) modules in the Atacama Desert. 
Sci 
Rep 
2018;8:1–14. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-
32291-8. 
You 
Semi-
Physi-
cal 
2018 
Modelling the 
soiling 
loss 
profile 
for 
seven 
cities 
worldwide 
PM50-20, 
Vd 
The soiling accumulation 
is calculated based on 
the deposition velocity, 
calculated from the local 
conditions. 
You S, Lim YJ, Dai Y, Wang CH. On the 
temporal modelling of solar photovol-
taic soiling: Energy and economic im-
pacts in seven cities. Appl Energy 
2018;228:1136–46. 

<<<PAGE 49>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
49 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apen-
ergy.2018.07.020. 
Zhou 
Semi-
Physi-
cal 
2019 
Modelling 
soiling 
loss 
based on par-
ticle 
deposi-
tion 
estima-
tion 
PM, Rain-
fall 
The soiling losses are 
estimated using a Com-
munity 
Multiscale 
Air 
Quality (CMAQ) model. 
The estimated PV panel 
transmittance is lower 
compared 
to 
on-site 
measurements. 
L. Zhou et al., ‘The impact of air pollu-
tant deposition on solar energy system 
efficiency: An approach to estimate PV 
soiling effects with the Community Mul-
tiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) model’, Sci. 
Total Environ., vol. 651, pp. 456–465, 
Feb. 
2019, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.sci-
totenv.2018.09.194. 
Micheli 
Linear 
2019 
Rank the se-
verity of the 
average soil-
ing losses of 
41 soiling sta-
tions in the 
USA 
using 
environmental 
parameters. 
PM10, 
PM2.5, 
Rainfall 
The work confirms that 
PM10 and PM2.5 are the 
best soiling predictors, 
followed by parameters 
describing the average 
and maximum length of 
the dry periods. How-
ever, it found that the re-
sults could be signifi-
cantly affected by the en-
vironmental parameters 
sourcing and processing 
methodology. 
Micheli, M. G. Deceglie, and M. Muller, 
‘Predicting photovoltaic soiling losses 
using environmental parameters: An 
update’, Progress in Photovoltaics: Re-
search and Applications, vol. 27, no. 3, 
pp. 
210–219, 
Mar. 
2019, 
doi: 
10.1002/pip.3079. 
Shap-
sough 
Linear 
& ANN 
2019 
Modelling the 
soiling 
loss 
profile of a PV 
installation in 
the UAE 
Irradiance, 
Rainfall, 
Exposure 
time 
A multi-linear and an 
ANN models were used 
to estimate the perfor-
mance of a soiled PV 
module, with no signifi-
cant difference between 
their results. 
S. Shapsough, R. Dhaouadi, and I. 
Zualkernan, ‘Using Linear Regression 
and Back Propagation Neural Net-
works to Predict Performance of Soiled 
PV Modules’, Procedia Computer Sci-
ence, vol. 155, pp. 463–470, 2019, doi: 
10.1016/j.procs.2019.08.065. 
Micheli 
Geo-
spatial 
2019 
Estimating av-
erage soiling 
loss 
from 
nearby data 
Nearby 
soiling 
data, site's 
character-
istics 
The average soiling loss 
of a site can be estimate 
using soiling data from 
nearby sites, by using 
spatial interpolation. 
Micheli L, Deceglie MG, Muller M. Map-
ping Photovoltaic Soiling Using Spatial 
Interpolation Techniques. IEEE J Pho-
tovoltaics 
2019;9:272–7. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHO-
TOV.2018.2872548. 
Laarabi 
ANN 
2019 
Modelling the 
soiling rate of 
a site in Mo-
rocco 
Irradiance, 
Ws, 
Wd, 
Ta, 
RH, 
Rainfall 
A 6-35-1 ANN model is 
implemented and vali-
dated. A sensitivity anal-
ysis shows that relative 
humidity, first, and sec-
ond, wind direction are 
the two most impactful 
parameters. 
Laarabi B, May Tzuc O, Dahlioui D, 
Bassam 
A, 
Flota-Bañuelos 
M, 
Barhdadi A. Artificial neural network 
modeling and sensitivity analysis for 
soiling effects on photovoltaic panels in 
Morocco. 
Superlattices 
Microstruct 
2019;127:139–50. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spmi.2017.12.
037.https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.2860. 

<<<PAGE 50>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
50 
Toth 
Linear 
2020 
Modelling the 
soiling 
loss 
profile for a 
site in Colo-
rado, USA. 
PM10, 
PM2.5, 
Rainfall 
A 
soiling 
estimation 
model is developed, and 
its results are compared 
for the PM measure-
ments of two devices: a 
traditional PM monitor 
and a low-cost device. 
Toth S, Hannigan M, Vance M, De-
ceglie M. Predicting photovoltaic soiling 
from air quality measurements. IEEE J 
Photovoltaics 2020:1–6. 
Coello 
Semi-
Physi-
cal 
2020 
Modelling the 
soiling 
loss 
profile for nine 
soiling 
sta-
tions in the 
USA 
PM10, 
PM2.5, 
Rainfall, tilt 
angle 
The soiling loss is esti-
mated based on the PM 
concentrations and the 
deposition velocities. Of 
the different approaches 
used to estimate the dep-
osition velocity, setting 
its value equal to the 
value of a fixed settling 
velocity returned the best 
results. 
Coello M, Boyle L. Simple Model For 
Predicting Time Series Soiling of Pho-
tovoltaic Panels. IEEE J Photovoltaics 
2019;PP:1–6. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/jpho-
tov.2019.2919628. 
 
4.2 Snow Models 
Snow modelling can be divided into two branches: direct energy loss prediction (consisting of 
stochastic and curve-fitting methods), and snow coverage prediction (consisting of threshold-
based, and first principle methods). In the direct energy loss approach, stochastic methods 
use only historical PV array output data, whereas curve-fitting methods develop empirical cor-
relations between array output and weather data. By contrast, models that estimate energy 
losses by predicting the shedding of snow from PV panels are more complicated. Here, thresh-
old models define limits that, if surpassed, result in snow sliding off a module at a defined rate. 
One threshold-based algorithm, the Marion model, is implemented in a popular PV simulation 
software developed by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). First principle 
models can also simulate snow shedding but are even more complex using energy balance 
equations to model melting and sliding. Overall, there are at least 11 models to quantify energy 
losses due to snow. Some have been validated at multiple sites, often in the United States, 
while others remain relatively untested. There is no consensus as to which model is most 
accurate and more validation work is needed at different latitudes, tilt angles, and mounting 
configurations [97]. 
4.2.1 Estimating Energy Losses - A Canadian Case Study 
Although many snow loss models for PV systems are available, few comparative studies have 
been performed. As a preliminary work, the performances of two snow-shedding models – 
Marion et al. [100] and Townsend and Powers [101] (see Chapter 4.2.3) – were compared for 
simulated PV arrays at different tilt angles and latitudes in order to create energy loss contour 
maps across Canada using irradiance and snowfall data from 190 combined weather stations. 
Energy losses for the Marion model were substantially higher than the Townsend and Powers 
model, and results showed significant geographic differences using the same data. The Marion 
model predicted peak losses at high latitudes in the Arctic Circle whereas the Townsend and 
Powers model showed the greatest energy losses in northern Quebec. The two models were 
compared to a real PV array operating in the Northwest Territories. The energy losses due to 

<<<PAGE 51>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
51 
snow predicted by the two models highlight the need for more validation by field data and the 
determination of latitude/tilt/technology specific snow shedding constants. 
4.2.2 Meteorological Weather Station Data Selection 
In order to estimate snow losses on PV arrays in Canadian climates for a given longitude and 
latitude, meteorological weather station data for solar insolation and ambient temperature were 
combined with data for fresh snowfall. Insolation and ambient temperature data were collected 
from the Canadian Weather Energy and Engineering Data Sets (CWEEDS) [98]. The param-
eters relevant to snow simulations that were provided by CWEEDS stations were hourly global 
horizontal, direct normal, and diffuse horizontal insolation, as well as dry bulb ambient temper-
ature. South of 58°N, there were 492 weather stations containing at least 10 years of data 
between 1998 and 2014. North of 58°N, there were 95 CWEEDS stations divided into two solar 
irradiance data sets: from 1998-2014 there were 23 sites using solar irradiance estimated by 
the MAC3 model from hourly cloud layer weather observations, and from 2005-2017 there 
were 72 sites using SUNY/NASA polar orbiting satellite-derived data. 
Snow data in this study were taken from precipitation stations measuring daily fresh snowfall 
by ruler, of which 1100 sites were available with data between 1968 and 2018. Each CWEEDS 
station was examined to determine whether there was at least one precipitation station within 
a five km radius with at least five years of overlapping data. Of the original CWEEDS locations, 
190 met the proximity condition and were matched with nearby precipitation stations (Figure 
20). For these matched stations, hourly irradiance and ambient temperature data were com-
bined with snow depth data. 
 
 
Figure 20: CWEEDS stations with combined precipitation data for 190 locations. 
 
 
4.2.3 Snow Loss Simulation using the System Advisor Model 
Simulation of snow loss was performed at hourly intervals using two models: the Marion [99] 
and the Townsend and Powers models [100]. Although other models have been developed, 
these two were chosen because they have been the subject of validation studies. The Marion 
model is integrated into the SAM software. For this report, the Townsend and Powers model 

<<<PAGE 52>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
52 
was coded in Matlab and was based on the outline provided in the snow shedding study for 
Truckee, California [100]. A separate version of the Marion model was also coded in Matlab in 
order to alter snow sliding coefficients. 
For each time step, the Marion model checks if new snowfall has occurred by comparing with 
the previous time step. If fresh snowfall has occurred, the array is assumed to be completely 
covered. If there was no snowfall, the snow conditions on the array from the previous time step 
are used. When fresh snowfall is detected, an hour-by-hour modelling occurs starting with the 
first daytime hour. 
The Townsend and Powers model differs from the Marion model in several ways. Instead of 
considering sliding of snow for hourly time steps, a monthly percentage energy loss is calcu-
lated based on correlations between measured and predicted monthly fractional energy loss. 
The Townsend and Powers model takes into account array-specific geometry such as clear-
ance distance above the ground, and the piled snow angle beneath the array [100]. 
The Marion model requires ambient temperature, plane of array irradiance and snow depth. In 
addition to these data, the Townsend and Powers model requires relative humidity. The Marion 
model can also be adjusted, by means of the snow sliding coefficient, to take into account 
snow shedding for different mounting configurations. The Marion model considers snow sliding 
to be the dominant removal mechanism and does not take into account melting or removal of 
snow by wind. Furthermore, the Marion model simulates shedding using time steps according 
to data collection frequency (minutely, hourly, daily), whereas the Townsend and Powers 
model aggregates data into monthly averages. To some extent, because both models rely on 
empirically derived constants, they are location, technology, and mounting configuration spe-
cific. 
 
4.2.4 Energy Loss Due to Snow: Model Comparison 
Snow loss estimates as a percentage of annual energy output were generated for 45° and 
latitude tilt using the Marion model and Townsend and Powers’ model for both rooftop and 
ground-mounted systems. The results of these models are summarized as a single country-
wide average snow loss based on all available years in Table 4. For the Marion model, the 
snow sliding coefficient was 1.97 for rooftop systems and 6.0 for ground-mounted. For the 
Townsend and Powers model a residential system with a clearance of 0.1 m above the rooftop 
was compared to a ground-mounted system with 2.0 m clearance. 
Table 4: Annual average energy loss due to snow across all sites with median in 
brackets. 
Array Orientation 
Marion 
Townsend and Powers 
Tilt = 45° 
 
Roof: 14.9% (13.7%) 
Ground: 10.1% (8.5%) 
Roof: 4.9% (4.4%) 
Ground: 2.3% (2.0%) 
Tilt = latitude 
Roof: 14.8% (13.8%) 
Ground: 10.5% (8.7%) 
Roof: 3.7% (2.3%) 
Ground: 1.7% (1.2%) 
 
As shown in the country-wide averages, the differences between the two models are substan-
tial even though they use the same annual weather files. Gridding was selected for the creation 
of snow loss contour maps in order to extend estimates from specific stations to a country-

<<<PAGE 53>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
53 
wide level. A commercial software used in the geological sciences for 3D mapping, Surfer 17, 
was used for the analysis. Automatic gridding (contouring) takes randomly spaced data and 
extrapolates using overlaid orthogonal lines which define cells and nodes. An algorithm is used 
to estimate values for all nodes. It must be noted that algorithms may also introduce noise, 
unrealistic features independent of real data, and values which may be incorrectly extrapolated 
into regions where data are non-existent or sparse [101]. The contour maps were created for 
45° tilt and tilt at latitude assessing both roof and ground-mounted configurations for each 
snow shedding model. The results are shown in Figure 21, Figure 22, Figure 23 and Figure 
24. In general, the Marion model predicted increasing energy losses at higher latitudes with 
annual loss ranging from nearly zero in warmer regions up to a maximum of 42% for a few 
stations within the Arctic Circle. Energy losses for ground-mounted systems were lower than 
rooftop arrays. Differences between latitude and 45° tilt scenarios were relatively small. By 
contrast, the Townsend and Powers model showed drastically lower losses particularly at high 
latitudes. The discrepancies between the two models remain a subject of further study. 
 
Figure 21: Tilt = 45°, rooftop array annual average energy loss [%]: Left: Marion, Right: 
Townsend and Powers. 
 
Figure 22: Tilt=45°, ground mounted array annual average energy loss [%]: Left: Marion, 
Right: Townsend and Powers. 

<<<PAGE 54>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
54 
 
 
Figure 23: Tilt = latitude, rooftop array annual average energy loss (%): Left: Marion, 
Right: Townsend and Powers. 
 
Figure 24: Tilt = latitude, ground-mounted array annual average energy loss [%]: Left: 
Marion, Right: Townsend and Powers. 
While using a monthly average simplifies the collection of precipitation data, it may also mask 
the complex process of snow accumulation and shedding that can occur on an hourly time 
scale. The discrepancy between the two models highlights the need for more validation using 
real site data. Fitting coefficients used in both models were determined using site data from 
Colorado, Wisconsin, and California. These coefficients could be expanded to reflect site-spe-
cific geographical conditions, mounting configuration, and module technology. As shown in 
Figure 20, the distribution of combined weather stations with snow shedding data are concen-
trated at lower latitudes, with relatively few stations north of 60°N. 
4.2.5 Model Validation by Comparison with PV Array Data 
In order to compare the models with a real test case, snow losses for a 104 kW array in Fort 
Simpson, Northwest Territories, were analysed. The Fort Simpson array has a tilt angle of 35°. 
The effects of snow were quantified by comparing the measured monthly yield to the estimated 
monthly yield [102] [99]. The estimated monthly yield was determined as a function of array 
insolation, irradiance-weighted module temperature, power temperature coefficient, and sys-
tem performance ratio at standard test conditions according to IEC 61724-1 (Edition 2). 

<<<PAGE 55>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
55 
 
To validate the snow loss models, Fort Simpson power output data and weather station inso-
lation from 2015 to 2018 were used to estimate snow loss. Next, the Marion model and Town-
send and Powers model were run using combined CWEEDS and precipitation weather station 
data from the nearby airport. The total percentage snow losses for three years of operation are 
shown in Table 5. 
Table 5: Annual average energy loss due to snow at Fort Simpson with median in 
brackets. 
Array Orientation 
Year 
Marion 
Townsend and 
Powers 
Empirical 
Tilt = 35° 
Ground-mounted 
 
2015 
11% 
2.2% 
8% 
2016 
17.4% 
2.6% 
12% 
2017 
20.4% 
2.5% 
15% 
 
These results show that the Marion model overestimated and the Townsend and Powers 
model underestimated snow loss. On average, the Marion model was closer to the empirically 
determined losses than the Townsend and Powers model. More work is needed to understand 
the causes of discrepancy and validate models with more sites. 

<<<PAGE 56>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
56 
 ESTIMATION OF ENERGY AND REVENUE LOSSES OF 
SOILING AT UTILITY SCALE 
5.1 Economic Impact of Soiling 
Soiling affects PV systems worldwide, and its effects change depending on the location, on 
the time of year, and on the characteristics of the site and of the systems. Recently, it was 
estimated that in 2018 soiling caused the loss of at least 3% to 4% of the annual PV energy 
production [6]. This corresponded to an economic loss on the order of 3 to 5 billion € (Figure 
25). These losses are expected to increase up to 4% to 5% and 4 to 7 billion € by 2023 due to 
a number of factors. First, more PV modules are being installed in high-insolation regions, such 
as China or India, which are also those that generally are more exposed to soiling. Second, 
the reduced price of electricity will make cleanings “less convenient” because the revenues for 
any kWh of recovered energy will be lower. Finally, under the same amount of soiling, more 
efficient modules are subject to larger energy losses compared to less efficient PV modules. 
 
Figure 25: Global Economic Losses: Economic losses per country in 2018 and in 2023 
for the top 22 PV markets. Data and methodologies from [6]. 
 
The previously mentioned work takes into account an optimal cleaning schedule scenario, 
where all the PV systems are operated to minimize the financial soiling losses, intended as 
combination of revenue losses and cleaning expenses. In a real world, the losses are expected 

<<<PAGE 57>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
57 
to be higher, as many systems do not operate at the optimal cleaning schedule. For example, 
the increasing share of rooftop installations might contribute to further raising the global impact 
of soiling. 
Cleaning a PV module has a cost, which is the combination of the cost of labour and the cost 
of the materials. This is generally expressed in currency per unit of surface as it represents the 
expense needed to clean a m2 of PV module (Figure 26). Factors such as the availability and 
the cost of resources (e.g., water) and the cost of workforce as well as the accessibility of a 
site can affect the cleaning costs. The expense per cleaning a full PV site (U) can then be 
calculated depending on the system size (C) and on the PV module types, as follows: 
 
𝑈= 𝑢⋅𝐴𝑡𝑜𝑡=
𝑢∗𝐶
𝑃𝑚𝑜𝑑/𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑑
 
 
 (12) 
where 
• 
u is the cost per cleaning (in €/m2) 
• 
Pmod = power rating 
• 
Amod = surface of each PV module. 
 
The equation shows that the cost U lowers while the efficiency of the modules increases, as, 
for the same power capacity, higher efficiency modules have less surface to be cleaned. 
 
Figure 26: Cleaning Costs and Expenses. Left: PV cleaning costs for representative 
markets, adapted from Ilse et al. Right: Expenses for cleaning a one MW system, de-
pending on the PV module’s efficiency. 
Cleaning a PV module that has no or limited soiling on its surface is an unnecessary expense, 
because the cleaning expense only leads to no or limited energy gain. On the other hand, not 
cleaning a soiled PV module is also a loss of money. For this reason, PV systems should be 
operated as close as possible to the optimal cleaning schedule, in order to maximize the elec-
trical performance and, at the same time, minimize the costs. Mani and Pillai [103] compiled a 

<<<PAGE 58>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
58 
list of cleaning routine recommendations based on the location, the climatic zone, and the 
weather conditions of the PV sites. This is a useful guideline, but the cleaning schedule should 
be specifically redefined for each PV site, because it varies according to a number of factors 
[104]. In addition to the cost of cleaning and the PV module efficiency, the profitability of a 
cleaning schedule depends also on: 
• 
The soiling deposition rate, 
• 
The capacity factor of the system, 
• 
The price of the recovered energy, in currency per kWh. 
Various economic models have been proposed to identify the most convenient cleaning sched-
ule. The most simple approach is to perform a cleaning whenever the cost of cleaning is lower 
than the revenue lost because of the missed energy production. A metric, named Cost of the 
Production Losses (CPL), was proposed by [105], to quantify the missed revenues caused by 
the unproduced energy due to soiling. It is obtained as the product of energy lost due to soiling 
and electricity selling price: 
 
𝐶𝑃𝐿= (𝑃𝑆𝑇𝐶_𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑛⋅𝜂𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑓⋅𝑇𝑀) ⋅(𝑅𝑆+ 𝑅𝑖𝑛𝑐)𝐶𝑃𝐿
= (𝑃𝑆𝑇𝐶_𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑛⋅𝜂𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑓⋅𝑇𝑀) ⋅(𝑅𝑆+ 𝑅𝑖𝑛𝑐) 
 
 (13) 
where 
• 
PSTC_clean is the STC power generated by a clean module 
• 
𝜂ineff is the efficiency loss due to soiling 
• 
TM is the worthwhile moment to operate the cleaning 
• 
RS and Rinc = values (in €) in saving and in incentives for each produced kWh. 
 
Using this approach, cleanings should be operated when CPL > U. The Cost of Production 
Losses equation has been modified to be applicable also to solar home systems [106]. 
This simple method works on matching the soiling revenue loss and the cleaning costs. In 
addition, ideally, the cleaning schedule should also take into account the fact that natural 
agents, such as rainfalls, wind or dew can have a cleaning effect on the PV modules at no cost 
[57], [107], [23]. For these reasons, there is room for an additional optimization of the cleaning 
schedule, as shown in Figure 27. In the plotted example, the optimal cleaning day would re-
duce the cost of soiling by 17% compared to the day in which the CPL > U condition is met. 
The data in the figure are modelled from soiling measurements taken in a Californian site over 
a dry period of three and a half months, considering a hypothetical one MW PV system made 
of 17.5% efficient modules, a fixed daily capacity factor of 20%, a cost per cleaning of 0.2 €/m2 
and an electricity price of 0.09 €/kWh. 
Because of this opportunity for optimization, additional models have been proposed in litera-
ture to further reduce the economic losses due to soiling. Jones et al. [56] proposed a method 
to minimize the total cost of soiling, intended as a sum of cleaning costs and revenue losses. 
A similar approach aimed to minimize the total soiling-related costs was employed by Ilse et 
al. [6]. From the analysis of data of a PV system in Saudi Arabia, Herrmann [108] developed 
a model to identify the optimal number of cleanings per year based on two parameters: average 
soiling rate per day and cleaning costs. Besson et al. [59] proposed a method to maximize the 
difference between revenues and cleaning costs: 
 

<<<PAGE 59>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
59 
𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝛴𝑡=1
𝑇
𝑠𝑠𝑡⋅𝐶𝑃𝑡⋅𝐸𝑃−𝑥𝑡⋅𝑈 
 (14) 
 
where 
• 
sst= the soiling loss on day t 
• 
CPt = energy yield in clean conditions on day t 
• 
EP is the electricity price 
• 
U is the total cost of one cleaning 
• 
xt is the decision binary variable of the plant on day t. 
 
In these approaches, the cleaning effects of rainfalls are also considered. You et al. [89] pro-
posed an optimization method aimed to minimize the Net Present Value (NPV) of PV sys-
tems. All these optimization models would minimize the economic cost of soiling but, com-
pared to the first simple method, which can be easily applied to take O&M decisions on 
fielded PV systems, are more difficult to use in a real case scenario, given the inter-annual 
variability of soiling and precipitations [87], [109]. 
 
 
Figure 27: Comparing Models. Left: Soiling Loss during a dry period registered for a 
site in California ( [87]). Centre: Comparing Cost of Production Losses and Cost of 
Cleaning to identify the most convenient cleaning day using the CPL method [105], 
[110]. Right: Comparing the total soiling losses for different cleaning days in a one-
cleaning scenario. Considered Conditions: One MW plant with 17.5% efficient module, 
fixed 20% capacity factor, 0.2 €/m2 cost per cleaning and electricity price of 0.09 €/kWh. 
5.2 Soiling Losses Worldwide: Resources and Variability 
Many publications have now been presented on PV soiling losses and related topics. However, 
many of these are independent case studies, and soiling information is often not reported in a 
systematic way. Various metrics are indeed used to quantify soiling, and, in some cases, the 
same metrics have slightly different definitions. For example, annual soiling ratios have been 

<<<PAGE 60>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
60 
reported both as simple averages of daily value and as irradiance-weighted averages of daily 
values. 
In an effort to gather all this information, some resources have been made available to show 
soiling data from different locations. Several review articles have collected data published in 
literature [12], [11], [111], [6]. The first soiling map2 has been published by the NCPRE (India) 
and reports the soiling rates [%/day] collected for many locations worldwide. The values are 
sourced from the literature, and therefore each calculated in a unique way. On the other hand, 
the NREL soiling map3 shows 83 soiling data measured at PV systems and soiling stations 
located in the USA. In this case, soiling is quantified using a systematic approach, but it is 
different for soiling stations and PV systems [3]. These resources are of value, because they 
can be used to estimate soiling for sites where no soiling data are available. Indeed, it is pos-
sible to estimate the soiling losses for a site through spatial interpolation techniques, given one 
or more soiling data from nearby locations [94]. The uncertainty in the estimation was found to 
lower if sites with similar characteristics (e.g., tracking type or mounting type) were compared. 
None of the resources listed before currently takes into account the temporal and spatial vari-
ability of soiling. Indeed, nearby systems can soil differently and even soiling within the same 
site can change significantly. This can be the result of several factors, ranging from the climatic 
conditions to the system characteristics and the PV module design [23]. Gostein et al. [51] 
showed that the losses within the same site can vary by a factor of 2x. In a more recent study, 
conducted for two sites in California, it was found that even the soiling rate can vary by factors 
of 2x or 3x. The non-uniformity can depend on the spatial distribution of soiling “emitters” and 
on the prevailing wind direction. 
5.3 Case Study: Long-Term Soiling Losses in a Moderate Climate 
Soiling is generally assumed to be an issue only for arid or desert regions. In addition, PV 
systems in rainy locations might be easily considered to be constantly washed by the regular 
precipitations. The example that follows, instead, shows how soiling can slowly build up also 
in locations, such as Switzerland, commonly considered as soiling-free. 
The PV-Laboratory of Bern University of Applied Science (BFH) Burgdorf has operated a test 
centre for PV-systems with a solar generator of 60 kWp, since 1994. The system consists of 
1056 framed modules Siemens M55HO mounted in summer 1993 with a tilt angle of 30° and 
the long side in horizontal position. This solar generator is split in two parts of 30 kWp called 
“Tiergarten West” and “Tiergarten Ost”. 
The solar generator is on top of the building of the department of electrical engineering of BFH 
Burgdorf, about 10 m over ground in a town of about 15’000 inhabitants. In the region sur-
rounding this town, there are light industries and forests and farms causing biological pollution 
(with pollen) especially in spring. The most important external source of unusual pollution is a 
railway line (Bern-Zürich) at a distance of less than 100 m of the PV system. As the railway 
station of Burgdorf, where many trains stop, is less than one km away, many trains are braking 
or accelerating when they pass the building. The region is pretty humid, natural rainfall is more 
than 1’000 litres per m2 a year and is distributed sufficiently over the whole year. These condi-
tions made natural cleaning considered to be sufficient before installation of the plant. 
While in the years 1994 up to 1996 only in spring a clearly visible pollution was observed, in 
course of 1997, with a rather dry and sunny period from the end of July until the beginning of 
November, a development of a permanent pollution strip (compact pollution up to 1 cm, 
 
2 http://www.ncpre.iitb.ac.in/ncpre/pages/SERIIUS_Soiling_rate_of_the_World.html 
3 https://www.nrel.gov/pv/soiling.html 

<<<PAGE 61>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
61 
followed by a strip of visible, but not compact pollution) close to the lower edge of the module 
frame was registered. The influence of this polluting strip on array performance was found to 
be especially severe on the PV modules of the main generator (with the long side in horizontal 
position), because of the very small distance between the cells and the frame (1-2 mm). A loss 
as high as 10% built up until spring 1998 [112]. Until that time, artificial cleanings were per-
formed only on the irradiance sensors and not on the PV modules. 
Because of the significant impact of soiling, a periodical cleaning schedule was then estab-
lished, and cleanings were performed in the summer of 1998, 2002, 2006, 2010, 2012, 2016 
and 2020. 
String IV-Measurements of the 30 kWp “Tiergarten West” installation were performed some 
days before and after each cleaning. Depending on the weather conditions and actual gener-
ator soiling, the average “gain” due to the cleaning varies from few precents up to 10% (Table 
6). 
 
Table 6: Percentage calculations of the performance gain were made for the years 
2002 to 2020 from string IV measurements. 
Year 
1998 
2002 
2006 
2010 
2012 
2016 
2020 
Increase in % 10.0% 
9.3% 
3.2% 
9.9% 
2.3% 
9.9% 
5.4% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To investigate the long-time effect on the performance of the installation, the generator correc-
tion factor kG is calculated from the monitoring data which is a measure for different operation 
losses including soiling. 
Figure 28 shows the qualitative progression of the measured losses due to soiling, as well as 
the respective gain after cleaning the installation. The values of kG have been averaged for 
one year for the summer season from April to September that periods of snow coverage are 
excluded. In case of cleaning this season is divided into the months before and after cleaning. 
In 2020 it was cleaned end of August. The kG data point of Period 8 consists only of the meas-
ured point in September 2020. 
For the cleanings until 2010 a clear increase of kG as effect of the cleaning can be seen. From 
2012 on no longer-lasting performance gain can be found. It seems that the modules are get-
ting faster back to a normal equilibrium soiling degree. It might be, that the glass surface of the 
module has changed over time due to aging of the modules or inadequate cleaning. 
 

<<<PAGE 62>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
62 
 
Figure 28: The performance ratio of the 30 kWp “Tiergarten West” installation from 1994 
to 2020. 
As shown, soiling can slowly build up throughout the years even in those locations frequent 
natural cleaning events occur. For this reason, annual, or at least periodical, manual cleanings 
should always be performed on PV systems, to remove any hard-to-remove soiling that is not 
washed away from natural events and to prevent the creation of hard bonds between soiling 
and the surface of the modules [91]. 
 
 

<<<PAGE 63>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
63 
 MITIGATION OF SOILING LOSSES IN PV SYSTEMS 
Generally speaking, soiling mitigation methods can be classified into preventive and corrective 
measures. Preventive measures fall into the responsibility of engineering, procurement, and 
construction (EPC), in terms of site and module selection, anti-soiling coating applications, site 
adaption, etc, whereas corrective measures fall into the competence of O&M, such as choos-
ing the right cleaning technology. Several authors have summarized mitigation strategies, e.g. 
AlDowsari et al. [113], Ilse et al. [6], together with a techno-economic assessment of losses 
and mitigation strategies. 
Cleaning can be subdivided into manual-, semi- and fully automated cleaning, with respective 
water consumption. Costs, potential damages and influence of micro-climates vary considera-
bly. There is consensus that there is no “one-method-fits-all” approach, because soiling 
strongly depends on local conditions. 
Anti-Soiling Coatings (ASC) hinder the deposition of particles, and are described by particle 
adhesion physics, electrodynamic shields that use electrostatic forces to move particles away. 
Ilse et al. [6] also suggest implementing dew mitigation, as dew is a major factor in cementation 
and caking processes that might lead to crusts that cannot be easily removed. Lastly, site 
adaptation, new module- and plant designs (e.g., vertical bifacial modules facing east-west), 
and tracking solutions (e.g., nightly stow-away) have the potential to further mitigate soiling. 
 
Figure 29: Soiling mitigation approaches apart from cleaning [6]. 

<<<PAGE 64>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
64 
6.1 Preventive Mitigation Methods 
6.1.1 Site Assessment, Adaption and Planning 
From the beginning of the design and construction phase, soiling considerations should be an 
integral part of system design. Knowledge about local meteorological conditions like main wind 
direction, rain frequencies, relative humidity and dew occurrence will help in adapting systems 
to minimize soiling. For example, nearby dirt roads can be lined with vegetation in order to 
deflect dust gusts. Frameless modules may make it easier for soiling to be removed, and an 
optimized module design with bypass diodes can minimize the effect of partial shading by 
heterogenous soiling. As illustrated by examples in chapter 6.2.3, single- and double-axis 
trackers may be beneficial as well. 
 
6.1.2 Anti-Soiling-Coatings 
Hydrophilic/Hydrophobic Coatings 
Passive preventive methods, also known as easy-to-clean, self-cleaning, or anti soiling, are 
based on coatings that can be classified as hydrophobic, hydrophilic or photocatalytic. 
Hydrophobic coatings with easy-to-clean surfaces have low surface energies, resulting in wa-
ter-repellent surface properties with high contact angles, which lead to droplet formation. 
These water droplets are then meant to roll-off and collect dust particles from the surface. By 
applying a specific microstructure, they can be tuned towards a superhydrophobic surface with 
a contact angle (CA) of more than 150°, often referred to as a lotus effect, inducing a self-
cleaning functionality. Such coatings are based mostly on fluoropolymers or hydrophobic func-
tionalized silica. 
Hydrophilic coatings with self-cleaning surfaces, on the other hand, attract water due to high 
surface energies. Therefore, they show low contact angles, which lead to water spreading 
across the surface. If a CA of less than 10° is achieved (superhydrophilic), a complete wetting 
is guaranteed under the assumption that the angle of inclination and amount of water are suf-
ficient. The coating materials are based on silicon dioxides or titanium dioxide. Coatings based 
on the latter material offer both photocatalysis, which prevents decomposition of organic con-
taminants under UV irradiation and improves mitigation, and superhydrophilicity, which facili-
tates the washing of contaminants from the surface by rainwater [114], [87]. Typically, hydro-
philic ASCs are deposited by sputtering or wet chemical processes (e.g., roller coating). 

<<<PAGE 65>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
65 
 
 
Figure 30: Different types of AS Coatings [115]. 
There is not agreement as to whether hydrophilic or hydrophobic ASCs are effective [116]. For 
instance, even if hydrophobic coatings make PVs easier to clean, they won’t necessarily result 
in anti-soiling properties [117]. In fact, under certain circumstances, coatings can actually in-
crease soiling when compared to uncoated glass. The benefit of ASCs must therefore be indi-
vidually assessed for each target location in a technical-economic evaluation, taking into ac-
count realistic climatic conditions, cleaning cycles, manufacturing costs and other factors [87], 
[6]. On the other hand, Ilse et al. [6] show that the application of ASCs might enable PV array 
operators to increase the time between cleaning cycles, thereby reducing the associated costs. 
Depending on local weather conditions, cost reductions of 20-50% can be achieved with ASC 
alone. 
From investigations in outdoor and laboratory tests, five dry and wet soiling mechanisms have 
been identified for arid regions [23]: rebound, resuspension, caking, cementation, and water 
cleaning. To minimize soiling with ASCs, each of these mechanisms could be addressed. How-
ever, restrictions resulting from physical phenomena must be taken into account. These in-
clude location factors such as fouling rates and periodic weather fluctuations. Another im-
portant issue is the general physics of particle adhesion, in particular of dust particles with 
diameters smaller than 20 µm, which typically cannot be removed by wind and contribute to a 
large proportion of soiling when combined with dew [6], [50], [118], [119]. 
In terms of optimized cleaning processes for ASC-equipped PV modules, Lorenz et al. [120] 
simulated the influence of soiling for a rainy and a dry year based on a reference model, as 
shown in Figure 31. The reference represents a typical year in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia based on 
empirical data from 1985 to 2010. As shown in Figure 41, a surplus of 3.2% of the annual 
economic yield can be achieved during a typical year, while a surplus of 3.34% and 3.24% can 
be achieved during dry and rainy years, respectively. 

<<<PAGE 66>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
66 
 
 
 
Figure 31: Optimized cleaning processes for ASC equipped PV modules, influence of 
Soiling [120]. 
 
Figure 32: Yearly gains with ASCs and optimized cleaning strategy [120]. 
Based on transmission data, the tendency towards easier cleaning characteristics resulted in 
less power loss. Therefore, the advantages of an ASC are the reduction of cleaning processes 
due to natural cleaning methods. It is again noteworthy that, to achieve such advantages, the 
ASC needs to be carefully chosen based on local conditions. Further, a long lifetime cannot 
be guaranteed for all climatic regions, and some ASCs could increase transmission losses by 
themselves [8]. 
On the other hand, investigations showed enormous efficiency losses due to heavy soiling, up 
to -80% within six months [68] without an ASC. Mondal et al. [121] summarize the loss of 
performance up to 20% depending on test sites and other boundary conditions. However, prof-
its from the use of ASCs are mainly achieved through savings in cleaning costs and must 
therefore cost less than one €/m² after 10 years in relation to an ROI [6]. 
The effects of abrasion cannot be predicted, since in addition to cleaning processes, abrasive 
sandstorms (dust composition, shape, and size) and the environment also have an impact on 
the service life of ASCs. Investigations of the percentage area covered by ASCs from different 
coatings (hydrophilic porous silica and hydrophobic polymers) in two distinct regions with dif-
ferent cleaning methods – dry brush, low pressure water spray and wet sponge, and rubber 

<<<PAGE 67>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
67 
squeegee – have shown that in some cases considerable damage was caused by dry brush 
due to the abrasive nature of the contamination [115]. 
Recently, a study accomplished in Denmark, which represents coastal climate, suggests that 
besides the combined outdoor stress, which is difficult to reflect in indoor tests, the lifetime of 
ASCs is also influenced by the quality and homogeneity of the surface [122]. If the surface is 
damaged prior to the application, the degradation accelerates the damage, e.g., by blistering. 
Nevertheless, there are many standard methods to test the lifetime in advance, e.g., IEC 
62788-7-3 or VDI 3956-1, but the choice of cleaning method and materials has to be adapted 
to the climate, soil type and soil texture, and soiling mechanism. 
 
6.1.3 New Module- and Plant Concepts 
It is widely reported that the loss in transmission due to soiling is a strong function of the tilt 
angle of the glass [123], [12]. Specifically, soiling loss is the lowest for a tilt angle of 90º. Grav-
itational force on soil particles is an important factor influencing the settlement of dust on sur-
faces and can partly explain the tilt angle dependence. Formation of dew on the sunny side of 
the PV modules, typically during the night, enhance the adhesion of the dust to the glass sur-
face. These observations suggest that (i) vertically mounted solar panels would suffer the least 
from soiling, (ii) soil deposition on the rear side of a laterally mounted bifacial module would be 
negligible, and (iii) flipping monofacial modules sunny side down during the night could reduce 
soil deposition and adhesion. In this sub-chapter we discuss the effectiveness of these meth-
ods based on field experiments. The reduction in soiling by these methods is also quantified. 
The experiments were conducted at a test site on the rooftop of an 8-storey building on the 
campus of IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India [124], [125]. Geographical coordinates of the site are 
19.13ºN, 72.19ºE, and Mumbai has a warm and humid climate. The modules’ current-voltage 
characteristics were periodically measured using a multi-channel curve tracer (Daystar MT5 
3200). Pairs of crystalline silicon modules were used for assessing the soiling losses, one of 
each pair was cleaned every day and the other was left to soil. Soiling loss is characterized by 
the following equation, 
 
𝑆𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠 (%) = (1 −𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝑆𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑑
𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝐶𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑛𝑒𝑑
) ∗100 
(15) 
Where: 
• 
Energy was obtained by integrating the instantaneous power measured over the day 
• 
Soiling rate is defined as the slope of soiling loss versus number of days. 
 

<<<PAGE 68>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
68 
Figure 33: Experimental installation with vertically mounted bifacial modules. 
 
(i) East-West Oriented Vertically Mounted Bifacial Modules 
Even though vertical mounting of modules may reduce soiling losses, such a mounting would 
result in low energy yields in the case of monofacial modules, as the modules would produce 
substantial energy only during half of the day. This issue is partly addressed by bifacial mod-
ules with high bifaciality. If the bifacial module is vertically mounted with east – west orientation, 
the east facing side would produce substantial energy in the forenoon and the west facing side 
would be the major energy producer in the afternoon. 
In our experiments, we used two monofacial modules (100 Wp, measured at STC) and four 
bifacial modules (nominal bifaciality of 90%; front-side 229 Wp and back-side 209 Wp, meas-
ured at STC). Both the monofacial modules and two of the bifacial modules were installed with 
19º tilt, and they are referred to as Latitude mounted Monofacial modules (LM) and Latitude 
mounted Bifacial modules (LB) respectively. Two of the bifacial modules were installed with 
the front side facing the west with a tilt of 90º, and they are referred to as Vertically mounted 
Bifacial modules (VB). The experiment was carried out during December 2017 to April 2018. 
Photographs of the experimental installations on the 20th day of the experiment are shown in 
Figure 33. The uncleaned vertically mounted bifacial module experienced visibly less soiling 
than the uncleaned laterally mounted modules. Figure 34 shows the power production profile 
of the cleaned vertically mounted bifacial module on a typical day of the experiment. 

<<<PAGE 69>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
69 
 
 
Figure 34: The power produced by the cleaned vertically mounted bifacial module on a 
typical day of the experiment. 
Figure 35 (a) shows the soiling loss as a function of the date of experiment for the three pairs 
of installations. The soiling rate is seen to be 0.45%/day for the LM, and this is consistent with 
the experiments we had conducted at the same location since 2013 [126], [127].The soiling 
rate is seen to be 0.32%/day for LB. This is because soil deposition on the rear side of the 
module is negligible compared to that on the front side, and hence the contribution of the rear 
side of the bifacial module to energy generation is not reduced substantially by soiling. This 
effect was less pronounced for bifacial modules with lower bifaciality [124]. It is likely that lo-
cations with high albedo, for example white sand deserts, would benefit more from this effect. 
In the case of vertically mounted bifacial modules, the soiling rate is seen to be about 
0.02%/day, negligible compared to that observed for the modules installed at the latitude angle. 
 
 
Figure 35: a) Soiling loss for the 3 different types of installations. b) Normalized energy 
produced by bifacial modules mounted with latitude tilt, and tilt of 90º. The daily irradi-
ation measured at the location is also plotted for reference. 
Figure 35 (b) shows the energy produced by the LB and VB modules normalized to the irradi-
ance (in kWh) for each day. The normalized energy produced by the cleaned LB is seen to be 
always higher than the VB. However, the energy produced by the soiled LB, though initially 
higher than the VB, decreases as time progresses due to soiling and eventually crosses over 
and becomes lower than the energy produced by the VB. The crossover is seen to occur ap-
proximately after seven weeks of field exposure. 

<<<PAGE 70>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
70 
 
(ii) Reduction of Soiling by Flipping Monofacial Modules upside down during the Non-
Sunshine Hours 
In this experiment, conducted from early March to mid-April, 2016, modules with a nameplate 
rating of 90 Wp were used. One module was mounted at latitude angle throughout the experi-
ment and cleaned every day. Another module mounted at the latitude angle was not cleaned. 
A third, inverted module was mounted on a structure that enabled, through the manual opera-
tion of a lever, for the module to be flipped face-side down. During daylight, this module was 
positioned at the latitude angle, and was flipped upside down during the night. This module 
was also not cleaned. Figure 36 shows the third module in the two positions. 
 
 
Figure 36: The photograph on the left shows the inverted module during the day, and 
the photograph on the right shows it during the night. 
Figure 37 shows the soiling loss as a function of the date of experiment for the fixed and in-
verted modules. The soiling rates were estimated as 0.45%/day and 0.14%/day by linear re-
gression. The proposed mechanism results in a significant reduction in the soiling rate, and 
hence could result in a significant reduction in the cleaning frequency. Fall off from dust when 
the module is flipped, lower deposition of dust on the glass that is facing down during the night, 
and lower rate of adhesion of dust due to lower dew formation on the down facing glass during 
the night, are potential reasons for the lower soiling rate on the inverted module. 

<<<PAGE 71>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
71 
 
 
Figure 37: Soiling losses in a module fixed with a tilt of latitude angle during the entire 
experiment, versus that in a module which was stowed in sunny side down position 
during non-sunshine hours (inverted module). 
The following conclusions can be drawn from these experiments: 
• 
Bifacial modules mounted with fixed tilt at the latitude angle suffer from lower losses 
due to soiling than monofacial modules mounted similarly. This is due to the low or 
negligible soiling of the rear side of the bifacial module. This effect is more pro-
nounced with higher bifaciality and can be anticipated to be more pronounced in a lo-
cation with higher albedo. 
• 
Bifacial modules mounted vertically suffer from negligible soiling losses compared to 
bifacial modules mounted at latitude angle. In Mumbai, the energy yield of a vertically 
mounted bifacial module exceeded that of a bifacial module mounted at latitude tilt, 
after seven weeks of operation in summer months, when both modules were not 
cleaned. However, shading in arrays of such modules and appropriate structural de-
signs would pose challenges when scaling up. 
• 
Flipping monofacial modules upside down during non-sunshine hours can signifi-
cantly reduce the soiling rate, significantly reducing (in some cases completely elimi-
nating) the need for cleaning. This scheme could be implemented by suitably modify-
ing the installation structures, especially in tracking systems. 
 
6.2 Corrective Mitigation Methods 
6.2.1 Overview of Cleaning Techniques 
Especially in arid regions with hardly any rainfall and nightly dew formation, it might become 
mandatory to actively clean modules. The market for cleaning solutions is still growing world-
wide. Solutions include manual, semi-automated, and fully automated systems, applying rotat-
ing brushes and varying amounts of demineralized water. 

<<<PAGE 72>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
72 
From an analysis of the literature, Mondal et al. [121] suggest a classification of cleaning tech-
niques based on climatic conditions (Table 7). 
 
Table 7:Proposed cleaning techniques for weather conditions, adapted from Mondel et 
al. [121]. 
Weather/Area 
Cleaning technique applied 
Desert 
Vibration of surface and aerodynamic streamlining 
Dry 
Electrostatic biasing, autonomous robotic cleaning, 
sprinkler 
Rainy, humid 
Special techniques are not required, but can be com-
bined with anti-reflective coating 
Cold, moist 
Autonomous/robotic cleaning, sprinkler, and anti-reflec-
tive coating 
Snow 
Stowing/inverting, anti-reflective coating 
Hot, arid, sunny 
Electrostatic biasing, autonomous/robotic cleaning, 
sprinkler 
Cloudy, shaded 
Autonomous/robotic cleaning, sprinkler, aerodynamic 
streamlining 
 
More commonly, cleaning devices have been divided into four categories: 
● Manual devices such as dust brooms and water brushes. 
● Truck-mounted devices, which may include a water tank. 
● Semi-automatic systems that use portable robots, which can be moved from row to 
row. These systems can be battery-powered or wired, and they can be rail-mounted, 
frame-mounted or freely movable. 
● Fully automatic systems that are designed to regularly clean one row of modules. 
These systems are often solar-powered, and they can be rail-mounted, frame-
mounted or freely movable. 
Especially for high pressure water cleaning, it has to be noted that module manufacturers typ-
ically specify a maximum pressure with which modules can be cleaned. Warranties may be 
voided if these values are exceeded. Chapter 6.2.4 summarises the results from module clean-
ing tests and the effects that these simulated cleaning cycles have on float glass, with or with-
out anti-reflective coatings and/or structured glass. 
Kurz [131] concludes that “cleaning can be a “make or break” factor for competitive PV pro-
jects, as the production gains enabled by cleaning grow in importance as error margins are 
shrinking, with dry robotic cleaning to be the most robust technology currently on the market. 
Presumably, these technologies will further improve as they mature, and other technologies 
like automated drones will further enhance planning and operation of cleaning equipment. 
 
 
 

<<<PAGE 73>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
73 
Table 8 compiles a non- exclusive list of cleaning solution providers in the four categories. This 
market is rather dynamic and dedicated fairs show new developments every upcoming season. 
The Uniform Resource Locator (URL) is given where details to the solutions were available. 

<<<PAGE 74>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
74 
Table 8 Non-exclusive list of available cleaning solutions, sourced from [128], [121], 
[129]. 
Manually 
URL with further information, where available 
Reach-IT Pro 
 
Kärcher 
https://www.kaercher.com/int/ 
Unger 
https://www.ungerglobal.com/en/applications/solar-cleaning 
Cleantecs 
https://www.cleantecs.com/en/products/solar-cleaner 
IPCEagle 
https://www.ipcworldwide.com/us/product/solar-panel-pure-water-cleaning-system/ 
Truck mounted 
 
SunBrush 
https://sunbrushmobil.info/the-mobil-sunbrush/?lang=en 
SolarCleaningMachinery SCM 
http://scmsolar.com/ 
MERLO 
 
Rolhus 
 
BITIMEC 
bitimec.com 
Digcher 
 
Metalmeccanica 
 
hycleaner 
https://hycleaner.eu/en/produkte/hycleaner-black-solar-2/ 
Drone mounted 
 
BladeRanger 
http://www.bladeranger.com/ 
SolarBrush 
https://www.aerialpower.com/solarbrush/ 
Semi-Automatic Robots 
 
Sunpower 
 
Exosun 
 
SolarCleaningMachinery SCM 
 
Chemik 
 
Serbot 
 
Helios 
http://www.pv-roboter.de/ 
Gekko Solar32 
www.serbot.ch/images/documents/TD_GEKKO%20Solar_En_20- 13_06_06.pdf 
Fully automated 
 
Eccopia 
http://www.ecoppia.com/technology/ 
Sol-Bright 
 
Nomadd 
http://www.nomaddesertsolar.com/the-nomadd-technology.html 
Serbot 
 
WashPanel 
http://www.washpanel.com/prodotti.php 
Nozzle Sprayer 
 
Heliotex’s ‘automatic solar panel 
cleaning system 
https://www.solarpanelcleaningsystems.com/photos.html?galItem=63&galAl-
bum=2&galTag= 
 

<<<PAGE 75>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
75 
6.2.2 Electrodynamic Cleaning of Systems 
The solar power industry needs a more cost-efficient, fully automated, water-saving and time-
saving solution to clean dust and sand off PV panels. The solution must not damage the panel 
surface and reduce power loss in desert areas where panels need faster, regular cleaning due 
to frequent sandstorms and higher atmospheric dust concentration. For these reasons, the 
Electrodynamic Cleaning System (EDS) is a promising technology to clean dust off of solar 
panels, solar reflectors (mirrors) and glass surfaces, especially in arid regions. 
The EDS consists of a contactless cleaning solution using an electrodynamic cleaning based 
on the charging of sands particles. Dust particles are evacuated from the module surface via 
travelling waves controlled by high voltage (in the order of kV) electric pulses applied in dedi-
cated electrodes integrated below the front glass of the solar panel (Figure 38). Parallel elec-
trodes are embedded into the surface of the glass or the polymer, and then an electronic circuit 
creates travelling waves that levitate and repel the dust particles via the Coulomb force away 
from the surface. 
Masuda et al. [130] were the first to demonstrate particle transportation based on a variable 
electric field. 
 
 
Figure 38: EDS cross-section scheme of an electrodynamic system (EDS) for dust 
cleaning using four wire electrodes to create the travelling wave [131]. 
Practically, the EDS charges dust particles, alternating the application of high voltages on sev-
eral independent electrodes and creating a traveling wave that moves the particles on the 
surface. The electrodes can have various designs according to the final application (see Figure 
39). 

<<<PAGE 76>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
76 
 
Figure 39: a) Picture of spiral electrode design. b) Scheme of wire electrode design. 
Arrows represent the particle motion directions [131]. 
The company CleanFizz SA tested a small pilot module in the King Abdullah University of 
Science and Technology (KAUST) in Thuwal, Saudi Arabia (see Figure 40). Built-in sensors 
measure luminosity, humidity, surface temperature, and other essential parameters. Their re-
sults indicate that the EDS removes more than 90% of accumulated dust within the first 20 
seconds of each operation. Each cleaning consumes about seven Watts (about 3% the power 
of a standard PV panel). In the case of solar plants, a tracker could be used during the cleaning 
session in order to remove more dust more quickly. 
 
 
Figure 40: KAUST Pilot field test of the electrodynamic cleaning system from Cleanfizz 
at KAUST in Saudi Arabia [131]. 

<<<PAGE 77>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
77 
According to their results, the EDS reduced power loss due to soiling by 36% when compared 
to an uncleaned reference module, while the energy consumption to operate the EDS is less 
than 0.1% of the produced energy; the cleaning sequence occurs six times per day, and for 
each sequence only 10% of the PV module’s generated power is used, which is therefore 
equivalent to a total of about 20 seconds of generation loss per day. These first field results 
demonstrate the functionality of the electrodynamic approach and the negligible energy level 
required to power such functionality. 
In these test field conditions; the EDS will cost $10 to $20 per 72-cell module, which is about 
10% to 20% of the module cost [131]. 
 
6.2.3 Tracking Strategies: Single and Double Axis Tracking Systems 
Nightly stow-away of modules that are mounted on single- or double axis trackers are an easily 
implemented solution to mitigate soiling. Since soiling largely depends on inclination angle, a 
nightly “parking position” is a practical approach. Case studies from the Atacama Desert show 
that tracking solutions could also account for local conditions, e.g., daily morning fog and wind 
from the Pacific. 
Figure 41 shows the daily performance ratios on single and dual axis trackers during the dry 
winter months of 2017 in Pretoria, South Africa. The suspended particulate matter in the air 
during winter is caused by increased biomass burning for heat [132], so the likelihood of soiling 
losses increases. The 558 kWp single axis tracker system (two trackers) and the 200 kWp dual 
axis tracker system (17 trackers) sit adjacent to one another on the south side of the N4 high-
way within the campus of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR). Neither 
system was cleaned during the three-month dry season of 2017, during which no rain fell, so 
this time frame provides a reasonable dataset to compare soiling rates. The daily Performance 
Ratio on the dual-axis tracker decreased by 0.4% per week, while the Performance Ratio on 
the single axis tracker decreased by 1.2% per week in 2017. Soiling rates in 2019 measured 
in the range of 1.5% to 1.8% per week on the single axis tracker. 
 
 
Figure 41: Daily performance ratio trends for single axis and dual-axis trackers during 
the 2017 dry season illustrates higher soiling rates on the single axis tracker. 
The difference in soiling rates between the single and dual axis trackers may be explained by 
several mechanisms, and the analysis of happenstance data is insufficient to determine which 

<<<PAGE 78>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
78 
factor may be dominant. Wind may be lifting soil and dust one or two meters above ground 
resulting in greater soiling rates on the single axis tracker mounted closer to the ground (need 
reference). The modules on the single axis tracker come within 0.5 meters of the ground while 
the modules on the dual axis tracker come within three (3) meters of the ground. The orienta-
tion of the array during operation may be a more likely explanation, as tilt angle has a strong 
impact on soiling rates (need reference). During the winter months, the single axis tracker 
continues to follow the same daily path through horizontal at solar noon as it does during sum-
mer months. The dual axis tracker changes its path every day of the year, and the orientation 
at solar noon is near zero (0) degree tilt in summer months and near fifty (50) degree tilt in the 
winter months at solar noon. The dual axis tracker spends more time at steeper tilt angles 
during the winter months, so the effective area of the array is smaller compared to horizontal 
orientation and less dust and particulate matter will be deposited due to the force of gravity. 
The model is analogous to the cosine loss for current generation due to the angle of incidence 
between the direct beam sunlight and the plane of array. If the dual axis trackers could be 
stowed in a vertical position during night-time, the soiling rate may be reduced even further. 
6.2.4 PV Module Cleaning Tests 
More and more PV systems are installed in deserts with hot and dry climates. The loss of 
performance due to soiling can be in the order of 1% per day in some deserts [8]. This high 
yield loss must be reduced by regularly cleaning the PV modules. Only dry cleaning is eco-
nomical, as natural cleaning with rainwater is not possible. During cleaning, small dust particles 
can cause scratches on the glass surface, which reduce the optical properties of the glass 
coating or the mechanical forces caused by cleaning can damage the cells inside the module. 
The cleaning process involves a cleaning device, PV modules, the soiling and possibly water 
and cleaning agents. To qualify a cleaning process, an accelerated test should be performed 
with the planned components. 
Except for simple manual cleaning with linear brushes, nearly all cleaning devices use rotating 
brushes. Some prototypes have also been developed using ultrasound and electrical forces or 
high-pressure air [133]. Typically, the brushes are manufactured with split bristles of polyamide 
(PA) or polyester (PE). The length of the brushes varies from 50 cm up to more than six m. 
The brush diameter can be up to 50 cm. For automatic systems, the cleaning time for one 
module takes about one to two seconds. Brushes with closed EVA foam or PE microfiber felt 
are also used to reduce scratches caused by dirt accumulated in the bristles. 
Cleaning devices must be certified regarding accident prevention, electrical safety and elec-
tromagnetic compatibility (EMC). The evaluation of a cleaning device can be carried out with 
the machinery directive [134]. The test of the cleaning device should also include tests of power 
and water efficiency, the robustness of the machine in harsh environments (e.g., dust, sand-
storms, high temperatures, strong wind) and a review of the functional datasheet (e.g., climbing 
slope, cleaning area, cleaning speed). 
There is no international performance and functionality standard with pass/fail criteria for the 
cleaning of PV modules. However, test standards for the cleaning of cars, window glass or the 
abrasion resistance of paints or coatings could be applied. A practical test is the configuration 
simulation with the expected dust exposure, the intended module type and cleaning device, 
and the expected number of cycles. 

<<<PAGE 79>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
79 
Modules in temperate climates with rain must be regularly cleaned, because biofilms are diffi-
cult to remove, especially those caused by animals or industry. Cleaning should be done once 
or twice a year with water. To avoid residues on the glass after drying, rainwater or deionised 
water with or without cleaning agents must be used. The temperature of the water must be 
close to the module temperature to avoid thermal shocks. Shading of the modules can cause 
hot spots. For a reliable test, 50 cleaning cycles should be simulated. 
In addition, the removal of cleaning resistant-dirt must be tested. The performance and the 
functionality of the cleaning device can be tested on an outdoor test field or in the laboratory. 
The analysis of a reference test plant with natural or artificial soiling is also useful. Standards 
describe artificial soiling for glass, with soiling, drying and UV exposure cycles [135], or for 
headlights [136]. Dry abrasives, such as Arizona test dust [137], quartz sand, and wet slurries 
consisting of Arizona test dust or quartz flour [138], are also used for abrasion tests. 
Cleaning agents should be tested for ecological sustainability and functionality and the effect 
on PV modules. Analogous to salt mist corrosion testing, continuous and cyclic tests with wet 
and dry phases can be carried out. 
In dry regions, access to suitable cleaning water is limited. But even in dry deserts, dew can 
form during the night, reacting with the dirt and the glass surface, which can lead to a cemen-
tation of the soiling. For this reason, some power plants carry out daily cleaning during the 
night. For an operating lifetime of 25 years, 10,000 cleaning cycles must be simulated. This 
high number of cleaning cycles is typical for fully automatic systems. Weekly or monthly clean-
ing, which often occurs when sensors measure that the soiling ratio is below approx. 95%, can 
be performed with other types of cleaning: manual, truck-mounted or semi-automatic systems. 
The effectiveness and the destructive effect of a cleaning device should be tested, taking into 
account the soiling conditions and the cleaning frequency specific to a particular PV plant. 
In addition, the evaluation of reference plants can show failures of solar cells caused by me-
chanical stress or partial shading (hot spots). Also, effects of the frame and clamps can be 
determined. 
The draft standard for PV abrasion IEC 62788-7-3 [139] defines procedures for erosion and 
abrasion tests. The tests are designed to test small glass samples with standardized brushes 
smaller than those used for PV module cleaning. The apparatus includes a linear abrasion 
mechanism and an abrasive dispenser (slurry or dry abrasive). An enclosure is recommended 
for the apparatus to prevent spilling or spraying of dry or wet slurry abrasives, and to prevent 
the possibility of silicosis (with ventilation, for dry abrasives). The test methods are intended to 
imitate damage mechanisms that may occur during the cleaning of photovoltaic modules. 
Two cleaning tests are described, one with a waving brush and one with a rotating brush. A 
linear abrasion apparatus fulfilling the requirements of the wall paint test standards ASTM 
D2486 [140] or DIN 53778-2 [141] were used. The brush block was 3.5 cm x 8.5 cm in area. 
The brush bristles consisted of Nylon 6.12, 0.23 mm in diameter that extend 3.8 cm from the 
brush block (Figure 42). In Figure 43, the results for three glass types are shown. 

<<<PAGE 80>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
80 
 
Figure 42: Set-up of linear abrasion test with a brush according to ASTM D2486 [142]. 
 
Figure 43: Spectral reflectance of 3 glass types: a) float glass without ARC, b) float glass 
with ARC and c) structured glass with ARC - after up to 500 linear abrasion test cycles 
with a brush according to ASTM D2486 [142]. 
For the rotary abrasion test, an apparatus similar (but smaller in scale) to ISO 20566 [138] was 
used. The brush block was a round cylinder at least 3.5 cm in length and 2.4 cm in diameter. 
The brush bristles consisted of Nylon 6.12, 0.23 mm in diameter that extend 3.8 cm from the 
brush block. The bristle profile was round, with no taper or other change in geometry along the 
length. Under the brush, the test panel holder with the test sample was moved in both direc-
tions depending on the rotation of the brush. The spray jet stuck the brush directly. 
IEC 62788-7-3 can mainly be used for the evaluation of glass coatings. For the evaluation of 
PV cleaning devices, set-ups with one to three PV modules and the original brush with the 
typical operating parameter (e.g., speed, rotation and pressure) were used. 
A typical test procedure of cleaning sustainability of PV modules is 
● Preconditioning (Soft cleaning, light soaking) 
● Initial measurement (visual inspection, Pmpp, electroluminescence) 
● Special measurement (reflectance) 
● Testing (accelerated cleaning) 
● Final measurement (visual inspection, Pmpp, electroluminescence) 

<<<PAGE 81>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
81 
● Special measurement (reflectance) 
Ferretti compared two cleaning devices [143], a manually driven cleaning device working with 
water and a cleaning test set up with a rotating dry microfiber felt. Eight modules with anti-
reflection coatings were tested. Several module types showed strong deviations in reflection 
after the cleaning, indicating removal of the ARC. Reflectance measurements after cleaning 
with a nylon brush after spreading of fine and coarse sand [144] showed less abrasion than 
with the TABER abraser [145] in dry conditions. 
A proposed pass/fail criterion for PV module cleaning tests, especially for glass coatings, is a 
maximum gain in reflectance of 30% [146]. This criterion can be used for PV modules and 
glass sheets with a light trap on the back side. It is much harder than the most common 
pass/fail criterion for testing PV modules with a maximum power loss of 5%. For standard glass 
with 4% reflectance, this means a power loss of 1.2%. For ARC glass it is even harder. The 
hemispherical reflectance can be measured in the laboratory with an integrating sphere. Meas-
urements in the field are possible with a small hand-held spectrometer. The repeatability of the 
measurement must also be taken into account. 
Tests with full-size structured glass sheets without and with ARC were carried out without 
abrasive. After 10,000 cycles and an enlargement of the brush pressure with additional weights 
on the brush, no abrasion effect was measured for glass without ARC, but a significant effect 
for coated glass was detected (see Figure 44). The abrasive force due to cleaning is parallel 
aato the glass surface. In comparison with sand abrasion tests with abrasive forces normal to 
the surface, the effect on the uncoated glass is minor [147]. 
 
Figure 44: a) Structured glass without ARC b) Structured glass with ARC: Spectral trans-
mittance of structured glass without and with ARC after cleaning test with up to 10000 
cycles and optionally with additional 2 kg weight. No effect was measured for glass 
without ARC. A significant effect was measured for glass with ARC. 
Ferretti et al. [146] tested ARC coated glass sheets with a focus on the ARC abrasion and 
scratches on the glass surface. To simulate sandstorms every three days and 25 years of 
operation, 3,100 cleaning cycles were performed. For the soiling, fine (0.18 mm diameter) and 
coarse sand (0.38 mm diameter) has been spread on the glass sheets with a 60% glass cov-
erage. Structured and float glasses with different coatings were tested under the same condi-
tions. For checking the impact of different brushes, two types of brushes have been used for 
the cleaning, one made of polyester and the other one of nylon. Reflectance measurements 
and visual inspections were carried out every 500 cleaning cycles. For both brushes a contin-
uous increase in reflectance with an increasing number of cycles could be observed, indicating 

<<<PAGE 82>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
82 
that the ARC had been removed. For the nylon brushes, the increase in reflectance was higher. 
The results showed that fine sand had a higher abrasive effect than coarse sand. 
Dusts of different regions and materials were investigated for soiling and cleaning abrasion 
[50]. The abrasive effect of test dusts (diameter = 20 µm) mainly consisting of corundum was 
stronger than of quartz as Arizona test dust and calcite. 
A new standard (DINspec4867 [148]) is under development for testing with full-size brushes 
and original tempered module glass sheets. It is based on ISO 20566, which is for testing the 
scratch resistance of coatings for cars (see Figure 45). 
 
 
Figure 45: Laboratory car wash for testing the scratch resistance of coatings in accord-
ance to ISO 20566 [149]. 
6.3 Generic “Best-Time-to-Clean” Models 
As stated above, soiling has a daily and seasonal variability and a dependence on local con-
ditions. All these factors have a significant impact on the short-term soiling losses, which 
makes these more difficult to predict than the average annual losses [87]. 
Monitoring the degree and duration of soiling is important from an O&M perspective. In addition 
to maintenance, knowing the best time to clean the modules will help maximise economic via-
bility. This cleaning time is informed by the rate and degree of soiling on the module, as well 
as the economic implications of cleaning the modules. To determine the best time to clean, 
either quality real time data or a good soiling model are needed to predict future soiling. 

<<<PAGE 83>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
83 
There are a range of approaches to the modelling and prediction of the soiling rates, as we 
discussed in Chapter 4.1. One is to use the average monthly soiling rate to calculate the daily 
soiling rate [63]. The cumulative soiling can be calculated by summing the daily soiling rate for 
each day at the site without any rain. When there is more than 1mm of rain per day, the soiling 
level can be reset to zero [63]. This approach can use a small amount of soiling data and 
historical rainfall data at the site to predict future soiling levels. Other approaches use artificial 
neural networks to calculate soiling based on a range of environmental conditions [1]. This is 
computationally more complex but does allow more accurate predictions of soiling rates be-
tween individual cleaning events based on local environmental factors. An example of the cu-
mulative cleanness index determined from this approach is shown in Figure 46. 
 
 
Figure 46: Cumulative cleanness index as predicted by advanced neural networks [1]. 
 
There are also a range of approaches for cleaning frequency optimization. In areas of light to 
moderate soiling, heavy rainfall is considered effective at removing soiling and restores the 
modules power output [64], thus making is unnecessary to regularly clean. Where the power 
output of the modules drops below a desired output due to the long-term build-up of hard to 
remove soiling, then cleaning becomes necessary [64]. The cleaning can be done manually 
[150] and is conventionally done with water, which can be quite an expensive and time con-
suming process [64]. Other cleaning solutions use automated systems to remove soiling which 
have a high capital cost. The determination as to whether cleaning is cost effective will depend 
on the soiling rates, electricity prices and labour costs of the location. There are reports that in 
some regions of mid to north Europe that cleaning PV modules is not cost effective due to 
lower soiling rates and high rainfall [151]. While in regions in southern Europe it makes eco-
nomic sense to clean the modules [151]. Other studies suggest a simple and regular weekly 
cleaning cycle as good practice [103]. 
As the recommended time to clean will vary based on many factors at the site location it can 
be a significant challenge to determine the best time to clean, yet it is an important factor in 
minimising economic losses. The best time to clean, or clearing interval, is reliant on the power 
output of the plant, electricity tariffs, soiling rates and cost of cleaning [56]. Determining the 
best time to clean is done by balancing the total cost of cleaning against the cost of energy lost 

<<<PAGE 84>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
84 
to soiling. Jones, Baras et al. (2016) have developed a detailed model for determining the 
optimum cleaning interval (tc) for a system based on the following parameters: 
• 
Cost of cleaning operation at the start of the interval (Cc) 
• 
The value of the energy lost due to soiling over the interval between cleans (VL) 
• 
The value of energy sold over the interval (VS) 
• 
The power loss due to soiling (Ls(t)) 
• 
The power generated by the plant without soiling (P(t)) 
• 
Electricity Tariffs (R(t)) 
 
Jones, Baras et al. [56] have derived a solution for this: 
 
𝑉𝐿+ 𝐶𝑐
𝑉𝑠
=
𝐿𝑠(𝑡𝑐)
1 −𝐿𝑠(𝑡𝑐) 
(16) 
 
Where: 
• 
Ls(t) = 1 – e(-at) and 
• 
a is the average loss coefficient per hour for all months. 
 
This average value is used in other modelling approaches as well [63]. However, different 
environmental conditions may have an impact [56]. A better approach may be to use season-
ally variable soiling rates from real time data or modelled data [1]. This may yield more accu-
rate results. Example outputs from the model developed by Jones [56] are shown in Figure 
47. The optimal cleaning interval varies throughout the year, with a longer interval recom-
mended in the middle of the year for this particular site. 
 

<<<PAGE 85>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
85 
 
Figure 47: Example calculations of the optimal cleaning interval over the course of the 
year. Source: [56]. 
The model developed by Jones [56] can be used to determine the optimal time to clean 
based on several economic factors. To use these models, it is recommended to collect 
real time soiling data. This can be collected for the site and used to determine monthly 
averages, which the model [56] can use to calculate the best time to clean. This ap-
proach should be an accurate way of optimising the cleaning interval, however there 
are some general guidelines for cleaning in different climates proposed by Mani [103], 
as shown in Table 9, which can also inform O&M decisions. 
Table 9: General recommendations for cleaning in different climates, reproduced from 
[103]. 
Climatic zone and char-
acteristics 
Conditions influencing PV perfor-
mance and dust deposition 
Recommended cleaning cycle to 
mitigate 
impact of dust 
Group-I: Low latitudes – comprise mainly the wet, wet–dry and the dry tropical climate 
Wet tropical 
Average temperature: 
20–34°C 
Annual precipitation: 
>250cm 
Latitude range: 108S to 
258N 
Low latitudes require low tilt in PV 
systems for maximum solar gain, but 
lower tilts will tend to accumulate 
higher dust deposition. 
Tilts higher than latitude recom-
mended to reduce dust accumulation. 
High annual precipitation could mini-
mize dust accumulation 
High annual precipitation could 
reduce dust accumulation (by 
periodic washing). 
Weekly cleaning recommended 
during dry spells and may be al-
tered based on intensity 
of dust accumulation 

<<<PAGE 86>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
86 
Wet–dry tropical 
Temperature range: 
20–30°C 
Annual precipitation: 
>150cm 
Latitude range: 158 to 
258 N and S 
Trade winds dominate during the dry 
season; blow from the north-east in 
the northern hemisphere and vice-
versa PV systems with higher tilt rec-
ommended 
PV panels to be oriented to benefit 
from the cleaning effect of prevalent 
wind 
Weekly cleaning recommend for 
moderate dust accumulation; 
daily cleaning recommended in 
case of intense dust accumula-
tion 
Dry tropical 
Temperature range: 
20–49°C 
Annual precipitation: 
15cm 
Latitude range: 158 to 
258 N and S 
Regions prone to dusty desert envi-
ronments and frequent dust storms 
(for any PV configuration) 
Low humidity and rainfall Availability 
of intense solar radiation – PV system 
may be optimized to maximize har-
nessing solar energy 
Cleaning to respond to intensity 
of dust accumulation–minimum 
weekly cleaning recommended 
Immediate cleaning subsequent 
to dust storms Adoption/applica-
tion of dust-repelling coatings 
may be looked into 
Group–II: Mid-latitude climate – comprise mainly the steppe, the Mediterranean, the grasslands and 
the moist continental climate 
Steppe climate 
Temperature range: -4 
to 40°C 
Annual precipitation: 
less than 10cm in dry 
regions to 50cm in 
moist steppes 
Latitude range: 358 to 
558 N 
High latitudes require high tilt in PV 
system; a lower fixed tilt angle is rec-
ommended to optimize year-round so-
lar gain 
Dust generally tends to fall off with the 
increase in the tilt angle 
With an arid climate with little 
rains and high tilt angle a moder-
ate cleaning cycle (weekly) 
could be adequate 
With lower tilt angle (to maxim-
ize solar gain) a more frequent 
cleaning cycle (depending on 
dust intensity) might be benefi-
cial. 
Mediterranean climate 
Temperature range: 10 
– 40°C 
Annual precipitation: 
42cm 
Latitude range: 308 to 
508 N and S 
High latitudes require high tilt in PV 
system; a lower fixed tilt angle is rec-
ommended to optimize year-round so-
lar gain 
Dust generally tends to fall off with the 
increase in the tilt angle 
Cleaning is recommended once 
in a week or 2 weeks depending 
upon the rate of dust accumula-
tion on the surface. 
Regions with higher dust accu-
mulation 
(proximity to industries) a daily 
cleaning may be beneficial. 
Grassland climate 
Temperature range: -4 
to 22°C 
Annual precipitation: 
81cm 
Latitude range: 308 to 
558 N and S 
High latitudes require high tilt in PV 
system; a lower fixed tilt angle is rec-
ommended to optimize year-round so-
lar gain 
Dust generally tends to fall off with the 
increase in the tilt angle 
Higher precipitation would aid in 
cleaning the PV panels 
A less intense (weekly or bi-
weekly) 
cleaning cycle might be ade-
quate 
Regions prone to higher dust 
(due to human activities) might 
require weekly cleaning 

<<<PAGE 87>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
87 
 
 
6.4 Snow Impact Mitigation Strategies 
Improving array performance during the winter months also requires snow removal. While pas-
sive snow shedding from a module surface is a complex process consisting of sliding, melting, 
and removal by wind, sliding generally occurs best at tilt angles of at least 45°. For sites expe-
riencing heavy snowfall, angles of 60° or more are recommended. Snow shedding is also de-
pendent on racking configuration. The several centimetres of space between adjacent modules 
along the top and sides can hinder sliding. The distance between the bottom edge of a module 
and the ground is also important. 
Providing a clearance of at least a meter between the array and ground gives space for snow 
to pile. In cases with inadequate clearance, such as roof-mounted modules, snow will build up 
at the bottom of the module frame. Similarly, the discontinuity of a frame protruding a few 
millimetres above the cover glass can provide a foothold for snow and ice. The greater the 
weight of snow above the bottom of the frame relative to the frame length, the less likely an 
accumulation along the bottom edge will be able to support the weight of snow above it. For 
this reason, it is suspected that mounting modules with their shorter dimension parallel to the 
ground (portrait rather than landscape configuration) will encourage snow shedding. Similarly, 
larger modules will shed better than smaller ones. Using frameless modules is, of course, ideal 
for snowy sites. 
Group–III: High latitude climate – comprises mainly the taiga and the tundra type of climate 
Taiga climate 
Temperature range: -
22 to 16°C 
Average annual precip-
itation: 31cm 
Latitude range: 508 to 
708 N and S 
High latitudes (close to vertical) re-
quire high tilt in PV system; sun track-
ing mechanism may be required to ef-
fectively 
harness solar energy 
Lower ambient temperature improves 
PV performance 
Dust generally tends to fall off at near-
vertical tilt angle. Dust is a less critical 
factor in comparison to maximizing 
solar gain 
Weekly cleaning cycle should be 
adequate 
Clearing of snow accumulation 
needs to be addressed immedi-
ately (more frequently) 
Tundra climate 
Temperature range: -
22 to 6°C 
Average annual precip-
itation: 20cm 
Latitude range: 608 to 
758 N 
High latitudes (close to vertical) re-
quire high tilt in PV system; sun track-
ing mechanism may be required to ef-
fectively 
harness solar energy 
Dust generally tends to fall off at near-
vertical tilt angle 
Lower ambient temperature improves 
PV performance. Susceptibility to fine-
dust collection 
Weekly cleaning is recom-
mended, and 
adjusted based on type 
(fine/coarse) 
of dust accumulation 
Clearing of snow accumulation 
needs to be addressed immedi-
ately (more frequently) 

<<<PAGE 88>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
88 
Other methods of snow removal include manual cleaning, which may be possible if there are 
regular site visits. However, manual cleaning is time consuming, may not provide much addi-
tional energy gain, and may damage modules. Passive melting technologies, such as ice-pho-
bic coatings or nano-textured glass, are under investigation to test their durability and operation 
under different conditions. Active melting technologies such as reversing the current flow 
through the array are also available. Field comparisons of different removal techniques are 
needed to quantify the benefits of different approaches. 
Lastly, the electrical interconnection of modules can also affect energy losses. For example, 
as shown in Figure 48, a typical 72 cell module has three bypass diodes organized into sub-
strings consisting of 24 cells. Since snow sheds from top to bottom, it may be advantageous 
to place modules in landscape rather than portrait orientation so that some bypass diode cell 
strings can be completely uncovered even if snow remains on the surface. 
 
Figure 48: Electrical diagram of 72 cell module with bypass diodes, and example of pro-
gressive snow shedding in landscape and portrait orientations (snow layer movement 
down the module surface shown in blue). Snow shedding in landscape orientation can 
completely uncover bypass diode strings even with the module is still partially covered 
in snow. 
However, although the landscape orientation may allow more uniform exposure of bypass di-
ode strings, it will likely also hinder snow shedding compared to a portrait orientation due to 
greater build-up along the bottom frame. For series-connected modules, in the rare case that 
the junction box does not contain a built-in bypass diode, modules should be series-connected 
in groups of horizontal rows rather than vertical columns. Lastly, if a tracking system is used, 
modules can be stowed in the vertical position overnight to encourage shedding. Some oper-
ators may turn off their trackers during the winter months, when insolation is low, thus reducing 
reliability issues and power consumption by fixing the array at vertical tilt facing due south in 
the northern hemisphere or due north in the southern hemisphere. A tracking system adds 
additional complexity for remote locations and may not perform as well in cold climates due to 
motor malfunction or obstruction of the sun-tracking sensor by snow. See Chapter 7 for more 
details. 

<<<PAGE 89>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
89 
 SNOW SHADING OF PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS 
7.1 Introduction 
Commensurate with the precipitous drop in the cost of installed photovoltaic (PV) systems and 
favourable economic projections relative to fossil fuels, solar systems are proliferating across 
northern regions, where minimal irradiance and persistent snowfall in winter have traditionally 
inhibited solar deployment. Accompanying such growth, however, is the increasing recognition 
that, although PVs can perform well and be economical in colder climates, snow adhesion to 
the module surface, also known as snow shading, causes significant energy losses. 
The problem is widespread: snow occurs across most of the northern hemisphere and also at 
high elevations in both hemispheres and can persist on solar panels for days to weeks, de-
pending on prevailing climatic conditions and also on the design of the PV array. While more 
data are needed to quantify losses regionally and globally, snow shading is clearly detrimental 
to PV performance, decreasing energy output and increasing the levelized-cost-of-energy. 
Monthly energy losses, which translate into revenue losses, can be as high as 100%, and 
yearly measured losses, under extreme conditions, can reach 34%, although average annual 
losses worldwide are estimated to be on the order of 10% or less [152], [99], [153], [154], [155], 
[100]. 
At the same time, PV growth in northern regions is expected to continue at a high rate.4 Ger-
many, for example, added 2.72 GW of solar in the first eight months of 2019 and has a goal of 
98 GW total installed capacity by 2030. Norway commissioned 23.5 MW of solar in 2018, a 
29% increase over the previous year5. Sweden and Finland, where solar is viewed as a com-
petitive cost system, have also seen increased growth. Sweden now has an estimated 200 
MW of solar, mainly north of Stockholm [156]. In the US, four of the top ten states for solar 
growth are located above 40°N, and more than 7 MW of solar has been installed to date in 
Alaska at latitudes above 66°N. Canada has seen a 182-fold increase in solar capacity in just 
13 years. Russia commissioned 75 MW of solar in 2019 in its Far East region, at an approxi-
mate latitude of 54°N [157]. Other areas that consistently see snow in winter and are also 
accelerating 
PV 
deployment 
include 
Japan, 
China, 
and 
the 
Czech 
Republic. 
This anticipated growth has put pressure on the solar industry to reduce snow shading and 
increase solar performance in winter. 
To support those objectives, research is needed in five primary areas related to snow soiling 
and PV performance: energy losses, performance modelling, system and component reliabil-
ity, design optimization, and O&M best practices (Figure 51). In addition, this chapter provides 
an overview of the underlying factors that influence snow shading and identifies opportunities 
for minimizing snow losses from PV systems at northern latitudes. Not covered in this chapter 
is the topic of storage, which can help support better load management in regions that have 
dramatic annual shifts in irradiance. Rooftop PVs are also not extensively covered in this chap-
ter, neither residential nor commercial, largely because 1) many of the same principles that 
apply to utility-scale installations are applicable at other scales and 2) the economic drivers 
are very different. 
 
4 Growth projections have been revised as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which is estimated to reduce the growth of global 
solar by 17% in 2020, with a rebound expected thereafter. [Wood Mackenzie] 
5 pic.twitter.com/dC3YE8PfuJ, Berentsen, SolarPowerEurope (June 2022) 
6 Reference: http://acep.uaf.edu/media/293024/2020-Net-Metering-Update_20200309Final.pdf (June 2022) 

<<<PAGE 90>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
90 
7.2 Performance Factors for PV Systems at High Latitudes 
The operating conditions in higher latitude regions of the world are harsh and unpredictable: 
precipitation may range from freezing rain to heavy snow; temperatures may reach lows in the 
vicinity of -40°C and see dramatic swings; snow depths may reach a meter or more and high 
irradiance events can occur. To understand the capacity for PV growth in areas that regularly 
see snow, it is first necessary to understand the availability of solar resources as well as the 
climatic conditions that detract from – and contribute to – a PV system’s operating efficiency. 
 
A. Solar Resource Availability 
Energy generation from PV systems in cold climates introduces both challenges and benefits. 
On one hand, the contributions of low temperature and albedo on an array’s performance ratio 
during the winter season boost performance; on the other, the sun’s higher angle-of-incidence, 
which is determined by the tilt of the earth’s axis relative to the sun, and the lower irradiance 
intensity received by a PV system, result in losses relative to standard test conditions (STC). 
With greater angles-of-incidence, less light is coupled onto the cells. For most crystalline silicon 
modules, however, angle-of-incidence losses remain negligible until a threshold of approxi-
mately 60° is reached. On the winter solstice in Fairbanks, Alaska (64.8°N), for example, the 
sun rises only about 2 degrees above the horizon, providing less than four hours of dim light. 
In contrast, the sun’s elevation at the summer solstice peaks at close to 49 degrees above the 
horizon, providing more than 19 hours of daylight. Northern latitudes also see a large range in 
the solar azimuth (the sun rises in the northeast in the summer and in the southeast in the 
winter), and the average annual insolation may therefore approximate, or even exceed, annual 
insolation at lower latitudes. 
High latitude sites often experience prolonged periods of weak sunlight during the winter, 
whereas high altitude sites often have high irradiance levels throughout the season, although 
PV installations at high altitudes are relatively uncommon. For irradiance below around 200 
W/m2, as is typical for an average of nine months a year in Fairbanks [158], the linear relation-
ship between power output and irradiance breaks down and there may be a slight reduction in 
performance relative to standard test conditions. Such reductions are technology dependent, 
but one study has shown larger losses for thin-film CdTe and CIS modules relative to crystalline 
silicon due to lower shunt resistance [5]. Nevertheless, the combined winter reductions due to 
angle of incidence and low light are generally only 3% or 4% of annual energy production 
because summer insolation is so much higher. 
The large range in azimuth has sparked interest in dual-axis trackers populated with bifacial 
modules in northern climates [159]. However, with fixed installations not all the direct insolation 
can be utilized, since the sun at times can be behind the modules. 

<<<PAGE 91>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
91 
 
Figure 49: Seasonal variation in solar elevation in Sweden shows the sun never rises 
above 10 degrees and for only six hours in mid-December; in contrast, in mid-June the 
sun reaches an elevation of almost 55 degrees and remains above the horizon for about 
18 hours. This difference becomes even more extreme at higher latitudes (Note axis 
labels are in Swedish). 
B. Ambient Temperature 
While irradiance is the dominant determinant of solar performance, temperature is also an 
important variable. Conversion efficiencies increase linearly as cell temperatures decrease. As 
a result, PV systems at high latitudes, where year-round operating temperatures are relatively 
cool compared with lower latitudes, can perform relatively well on an annual basis. Crystalline-
silicon (c-Si) cells, for example, show a linear response of roughly a 0.34%-0.38% increase in 
efficiency per decrease in degree C and are most efficient on high-irradiance, below-freezing 
days [SINGH16], but will still perform better on a relatively cool summer day, in Sweden than 
on a sweltering hot day in Cairo, for example. The temperature coefficients for cadmium tellu-
ride (CdTe) and copper indium selenide (CIS) cells are slightly less than for C-Si: 0.32%/°C in 
the range of 25-75°C and 0.33%, respectively, as stated by the largest manufacturers of these 
thin-film technologies7,8. 
 
C. Albedo 
The presence of persistent snow cover for several months each year also contributes to the 
efficiency of PV systems at northern latitudes. White substrates, which are highly reflective, 
can produce albedos approaching unity, and can therefore boost the performance of both 
mono- and bifacial PV systems, but have the greatest impact on bifacial PV. However, since 
 
7 http://www.firstsolar.com/ 
8 http://www.solar-frontier.com/ 

<<<PAGE 92>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
92 
snow is refreshed with each winter storm, it can out-perform other white substrates because 
any soiling from airborne particulates is masked by the new snow. 
Both snow depth (typically accumulative) and the snow’s crystalline structure (which changes 
with temperature and age) contribute to its reflectivity, which influences how much reflected 
radiation hits the front and back sides of an array, with the latter being the primary driver of 
bifacial gains. The in-plane insolation shows a strong dependence on tilt angles, and is quite 
low at moderate angles, as shown in Figure 50, for example. 
 
 
Figure 50: Ground reflected irradiance calculated as function of module tilt angle (β) 
and different albedo (α) at horizontal irradiance (Gh) of 800 W/m2, using formula Gg= 
αGh(1-cos(β))/2. 
 
7.3 Global Distribution of Snow 
To correlate snow cover in different regions of the world with PV output, one can determine 
the number of days with snow cover and snow depth per day for each region of interest. Maps 
of snow cover are produced by different meteorological institutes in the world for different time 
periods with daily and average yearly statistics. 
In Europe, at latitudes less than 60°N, snow cover persists for durations of up to 160 days per 
year in mountainous regions such as the Pyrenees, across the Alps of Switzerland, and in the 
Carpathian range in Eastern Europe. In contrast, Great Britain, France, and Spain are largely 
snow-free year-round. 

<<<PAGE 93>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
93 
In the Nordic countries of Norway, Sweden and Finland, the number of snow days per year 
varies from around 60 days to more than 200 days at latitudes 60°N and higher. In particular, 
Sweden has a marked distribution from south to north. Measures of daily snow depth (snow 
cover >1 cm) during the winter can be found on the Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological 
Institute (SMHI) website9, which shows a range in average maximum snow depth of 0.4 to 
1.3m, depending on latitude. 
According to the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the average number of days per 
year with snow in Sweden varied from 25 days in the south to more than 225 days in the 
northern mountains for the period of 1961-1990, a ninefold difference for a small country that 
runs 1,574km in length. The number of snow days in Norway, neighbour to Sweden, is gener-
ally higher. This increase can be attributed to more extensive mountainous areas, where the 
altitude lowers the average annual temperature range, as well as to the higher precipitation 
from low-pressure systems entering from the Atlantic Ocean. The differences in snow days 
within Sweden and among the Nordic countries suggest that quantifying snow losses from PV 
systems must be region-specific, as would the economic calculations of any snow-mitigation 
strategy. 
But another trend has emerged from Scandinavia that cannot be overlooked as a contributor 
to PV performance: global climate change. In both Sweden and Norway, the number of days 
with snow cover has decreased in recent decades10 11, a trend that is especially noticeable in 
the southern half of Sweden. The relative variation in snow days between different winters is 
also greater in the south than in the north. This variation was especially noticeable in the warm 
winter of 2019-2020, when large parts of southern Sweden experienced unusual conditions 
with few days of snow cover. The trend to fewer snow days suggests snow losses will further 
diminish as the climate warms but also suggests that snow as a contributor to the performance 
of bifacial PV may be over-estimated in regions that traditionally have had more persistent 
snow. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 https://www.smhi.se/ 
10 SMHI. Klimatindikator – antal dagar med snötäcke. Updated 3 July 2019. Available: https://www.smhi.se/klimat/klimatet-da-och-
nu/klimatindikatorer/klimatindikator-antal-dagar-med-snotacke-1.91081. [Last accessed 20-Apr-2020]. 
11 MOSJ. Environmental monitoring of Svalbard and Jan Mayen. Duration of snow cover on land. Available: 
http://www.mosj.no/en/climate/land/duration-snow-cover.html. [Last accessed 20-Apr-2020]. 

<<<PAGE 94>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
94 
7.4 Focus Areas for Snow Research 
To further the growth of solar in regions that see persistent snow in winter, research is needed 
in four primary areas, as illustrated in Figure 51. 
 
Figure 51: Research challenges related to snow. Operational issues related to snow in-
clude energy loss, reliability, performance modelling and performance optimization12. 
1. Snow-Loss Metrics: Estimates of monthly and annual energy losses attributed to 
snow are based on relatively small datasets and lack the metadata needed to de-
velop mitigation strategies. A concerted effort is needed to quantify snow losses not 
only regionally and globally, but to correlate those losses with technological and de-
sign choices. 
2. Reliability: Snow and ice adhesion to a PV array creates thermo-mechanical load 
stress, exacerbated by extreme winter storms and freeze/thaw cycles that can crack 
solar cells, distort module frames, and damage coatings, resulting in under-perform-
ing and failed modules. Data on thermo-mechanical loading and associated reliability 
issues, linked to specific module and system designs, are needed. 
3. Predictive Modelling: Snow shading of modules creates significant energy losses but 
such losses in the absence of more detailed performance models are hard to quantify 
and almost impossible to predict, making accurate LCOE calculations and advance 
resource planning challenging for developers, investors and asset owners. Although 
forecasts can be made one to two weeks in advance, attempts to predict snowfall that 
far in advance have a high rate of error. More accurate models that take into account 
snow shedding variables such as module architecture are needed. 
4. Design Optimization: Designing systems that shed snow quickly is of great value to 
the industry. A PV system’s design can impact snow losses, underscoring the need to 
better quantify the energy implications of technological choices in snowy regions. 
Demonstration projects that can quantify the energy advantages (i.e., snow-shedding 
capabilities) of certain designs are needed. 
 
12 https://energy.sandia.gov/Snow 

<<<PAGE 95>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
95 
5. Best O&M practices: See Report IEA-PVPS T13-25:2022 “Guidelines for Operation 
and Maintenance of Photovoltaic Power Plants in Different Climates“, which covers 
O&M for residential, commercial and industrial installations at northern latitudes. 
7.5 Snow-Loss Metrics 
7.5.1 Methods for Measuring Snow 
Snow that adheres to the surface of a PV module, like other forms of soiling, decreases or 
often eliminates the solar irradiance reaching a cell and – depending on its uniformity – intro-
duces mismatch challenges and triggers the re-routing of electricity through bypass diodes. 
Unlike other forms of soiling, however, deep snow and ice can apply both static and dynamic 
thermo-mechanical stress to modules, introducing reliability concerns. The need to quantify 
snow accumulation and its impact on array performance is therefore important, not only for 
LCOE calculations, but also for system sizing, yield forecasting, and service life prediction. Yet 
no standard method for measuring snow depth on a module exists nor are estimates of snow 
load for IEC certification (IEC 61215) representative of actual snow loading, as the latter is 
based on uniform horizontal loads and therefore atypical of most PV systems. 
Measuring snow is hard for several reasons. To begin with, snow depth is not static. Rather, it 
is constantly changing, either through replenishment or through reduction/compaction. Snow 
can be removed from an array by wind and by sublimation; it can also compact as temperatures 
warm and partial melting occurs. In addition, existing models do not take into account snow 
density, although the latter is an indication of both age (snow tends to compact over time) and 
the crystalline structure of the snow, both of which have different sliding and transmissivity 
coefficients. Finally, snow shedding often occurs at different rates across a PV array, creating 
uneven snow depths at both the module and array level, which also increases measurement 
uncertainty, as shown in Figure 52. Snow models do not take this uneven distribution into 
account, but instead rely on data from snow gauges or heated rain gauges, which assume 
uniform accumulation. 
 

<<<PAGE 96>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
96 
 
Figure 52: Uneven snow shedding across PV arrays can make snow depth a challenging 
indicator of performance. 
Traditional methods for estimating snow depth on a PV panel include using data from weather 
stations in the Global Historical Climatology Network (GHCN), which supports a database of 
daily climate data from surface stations around the world that follow a common set of quality 
assurance standards. Alternatively, one can rely on measuring sticks installed onsite, although 
this approach requires active monitoring either by a person or a camera and can be affected 
by drifting snow, which introduces measurement uncertainty. Heated rain gauges, with a tip-
ping bucket, are more accurate as they capture snow as it is falling. However, they measure 
snow as a liquid and so give no information about actual depth, only the quantity of moisture 
that has fallen. Moreover, the above methods all measure snow on a horizontal plane and not 
at the tilt angle of a PV array. 
Newer approaches include the use of electronic snow depth sensors with two different physical 
principles: ultrasonic and laser systems. At the moment, ultrasonic sensors are much more 
common. Their measurement cone, which depends on the beam width and height of the sen-
sor above the target, is wider than that of the new laser sensors, and has a depth accuracy of 
around ± 10 mm. Ultrasonic sensors typically operate at 50 kHz, but because the speed of 
sound in air changes significantly with temperature, ambient temperature measurements are 
needed to compensate for any fluctuations. In contrast, laser snow sensors, which are rela-
tively new to the market, measure snow depth to an accuracy of around ± 5 mm, but have a 
small measurement point size, which can be detrimental to accurate snow depth measurement 
if the snow surface is uneven. To address this problem, some manufacturers are introducing 
multi-point measurements. A remaining drawback to laser-based sensors, however, is the 
need for power to heat the laser diode to ensure efficient operation and long life. This power 
requirement may make stand-alone operation of laser sensors in remote areas more challeng-
ing. Otherwise, both laser-based and ultrasonic sensors are mostly maintenance-free. A list of 
manufacturers is given in Table 10. 
 
 

<<<PAGE 97>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
97 
Table 10: A partial list of several products available for measuring snow depth. All 
equipment prices in this report are approximate. The manufacturer should be contacted 
for exact costs. 
Snow Sensors 
Manufacturer 
Campbell 
Scientific 
Campbell 
Scientific 
Lufft 
Judd LLC 
Sommer 
Messtechnik 
Model name 
SR50AT 
SDMS40-L 
SHM 31 
UDS 
USH-9 
Method 
Ultrasonic 
Optical 
Optical 
Ultrasonic 
Ultrasonic 
Beam width 
30 degree 
Multi-point 
Single point 
22 degrees 
12 degrees 
Power supply 
9 to 18 VDC 
12 to 15 
VDC 
12 to 24 
VDC 
12 to 24 
VDC 
9 to 27 VDC 
Maximum 
power con-
sumption 
4.5 W 
30 W 
18 W 
0.6 W 
1 W 
Output options 
SDI-12, RS-
485, RS-
232 
SDI-12, RS-
485, RS-232 
SDI-12, RS-
485, RS-232 
RS-232 
SDI-12, RS-
485, RS-232 
Snow depth 
Accuracy 
± 10 mm 
± 3 mm 
± 5 mm 
± 10 mm 
± 10 mm 
Approximate 
Cost: Euro / 
USD 
€ 1386 / 
$ 1574 
€ 2358 / 
$ 2678 
€ 2749 / 
$ 3121 
€ 622 / 
$ 704 
€ 1725 / 
$ 1959 
 
 
Several methods specific to the snow load on PV systems are being developed. To calculate 
the amount of snow on a tilted array, one can deploy several techniques: 
1) Measuring sticks that are affixed to a module installed at the tilt angle of the PV sys-
tem but left in open circuit. 
2) Displacement sensors that measure module displacement as a function of mechani-
cal (weight) loading, although the depth has to be modelled. The sensors can be af-
fixed to the back of modules, but they should be evenly distributed to capture data on 
the non-uniformity of the weight load, including build-up at the lower edge. 
3) Stereographic digital images that are taken normally to the end of an array. This tech-
nique, however, requires the installation of cameras and a datalogger to store im-
ages. 
In addition, a new method has recently been developed that allows one to measure the per-
centage of a system covered with snow (and thereby to model and predict snow-related power 
losses). The method relies on time-series images taken at five-minute intervals that are then 
binarized into snow and clear areas that can be quantified relative to one another [160]. This 
technique, which is still being refined, does not yet account for snow depth. 
7.5.2 Predictive Modelling of Snow Losses 
Snow-shading losses can be calculated by comparing expected system performance without 
snow with the actual performance of a system that is fully or partially covered with snow, but 

<<<PAGE 98>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
98 
those losses are historic and not predictive. Moreover, this method requires the analysis of 
time-stamped digital images to determine the percentage of modules covered and the changes 
in coverage over time relative to a heated plane-of-array pyranometer. Predicting or modelling 
the impact of snow, given the rapid expansion of PVs in winter climates, is essential to accurate 
levelized cost-of-energy calculations and to resource planning for utility-scale installations that 
feed into the grid. 
The energy losses attributed to snow shading impact the LCOE of PVs in northern regions and 
also resource availability, which can be an issue especially when winter storms take down 
power lines. 
A key challenge to the deployment of PVs in snow-prevalent areas is predicting accurate an-
nual energy yields for PV systems, given the inherent intra- and inter-seasonal variability of 
snowfall and the many factors that contribute to snow adhesion to modules. Several attempts 
have been made to estimate yearly energy losses attributable to snow on PV panels, but the 
published data reflect a limited number of sites, small study sizes, and incomplete accounting 
of the variables that contribute to snow losses. Moreover, none of these models considers 
system-design factors other than tilt angle, yet design parameters can be significant contribu-
tors to a system’s snow-shedding ability. 
To date, several snow-loss models have been developed that express snow losses as a per-
centage of annual energy production [100], [161], [99]. These models take into account tilt 
angle, temperature, humidity, and irradiance, and they include a sliding coefficient based on 
the frictional resistance of waxed skis. All these models assume that the primary removal 
mechanism is snow sliding from the panel. In addition, no major PV modelling software product 
supports snow loss modelling beyond simple scaling, as in PVWatts [162]. However, Ryberg 
et al. [163] have incorporated the snow model from Marion et al. [99] into the National Renew-
able Energy Laboratory’s (NREL) System Advisor Model (SAM). 
There are two primary mechanisms by which snow sheds from the module surface, melting 
and sliding, though the two are interrelated and wind is an additional factor. Melting typically 
occurs when the snow layer is thin and able to melt quickly as the air temperature rises to near 
or above 0°C, a process that is accelerated by high solar irradiance. Snow sliding is generally 
triggered by a reduction in frictional forces, which may occur when a thin layer of melted snow 
forms at the module surface or when the weight of the snow is sufficient to overcome surface 
resistance, causing detachment at the snow-substrate interface. Sliding can occur relatively 
quickly thereafter, although snow shedding may be non-uniform if there is partial shading of 
the array. 
Although no coefficient of friction of snow on PV modules has yet been proposed, the sliding 
force of snow is captured in the following equation [99]: 
 
𝐹𝑆= µ ∗𝑚∗𝑔∗cos (𝛽) 
 
 (17) 
Where: 
• 
the sliding force attributable to gravity, Fs, is determined by the static coefficient of 
friction for snow (μ), the mass of snow (m), the acceleration of gravity (g) and the tilt 
angle cos(β). 
• 
µ= the static coefficient of friction for snow 
• 
m=mass of snow 

<<<PAGE 99>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
99 
• 
g=acceleration of gravity 
• 
β=tilt angle 
Sliding can also occur at ambient-air temperatures below freezing if there is sufficient irradi-
ance for some melting to occur and depending on the tilt angle. The higher the tile angle, the 
likelier snow shedding will occur earlier and fully shed at a faster rate. For sites experiencing 
heavy snowfall, angles of 60° or more are recommended to induce sliding. More data, how-
ever, including average annual energy yields, are needed to confirm that recommendation. A 
study conducted in northern Sweden (latitude of 65°N), for example, suggests that module tilt 
is a minimal contributor to snow shedding when there is no physical impediment from the mod-
ule frame. In this study by Granlund et al. [164], ten frameless bifacial modules were installed, 
in 5° tilt increments, from 0 to 90°. All were found to clear snow at comparable rates, with the 
exception of the 0° and 90° modules. The study’s authors concluded that, with no significant 
difference in snow-shedding rates between modules installed from 25° to 80°, tilt angle should 
not be the primary determinant of system design in northern climates. One might assume that 
once a melt-layer forms, which is temperature rather than tilt-angle dependent, that the resis-
tive forces are the same across all tilt angles. The Granlund study, however, is based on single 
modules and does not take into account physical factors specific to PV arrays, such as the gap 
between modules, the presence of a frame, or clip morphology, all of which create physical 
barriers to snow shedding. The study also does not take into account the depth, density or 
homogeneity of the snow, which can create enough sliding force to overcome the frictional 
force of the module surface and contribute to shedding. 
To provide better estimation tools, several innovative approaches to snow-loss modelling have 
recently appeared in the literature. A team at the Universite de Quebec has proposed a daily 
snow-loss prediction model developed from four years of hourly meteorological data and mul-
tiple machine learning algorithms. The model is divided into three parts: yield, power-loss (from 
all sources, including snow, mismatch, DC cable losses, maximum powerpoint tracking and 
low irradiance), and snow-loss (the percentage of power loss attributed to snow). Like its pre-
decessors, this model has yet to be validated for more than one site [165]. A second team, 
also at the Universite de Quebec, has developed an alternative model that estimates the 
amount of irradiance that can filter through a module when the latter is uniformly covered with 
snow, per the Bouguer-Lambert Law of insolation transmission and associated electrical char-
acteristics of PV modules, but this model has also not been validated [166]. 
Other models have attempted to predict snow melting from a surface but they only consider 
horizontal surfaces [167] [168]; a more recent snow-melting model incorporates heat and mass 
transfer equations as well as operating parameters specific to PV systems [169]. This model 
assumes that melting can occur both at the module surface (the result of external heating), 
and at the top surface, if irradiance and ambient air temperature are high enough, with surface 
run-off flowing through the snow in the direction of the panel tilt. Inputs to the model include 
measured energy needed to precipitate snow sliding, tilt angle, snow cover measured as mass 
per unit area, and ambient temperature. Parameters not modelled, however, include soiling of 
the panel, surface topology, presence or absence of a frame and build-up of ice along the 
bottom frame that creates a physical barrier to sliding. 
 
 

<<<PAGE 100>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
100 
7.6 Design Optimization for Snowy Climates 
Preliminary research suggests that climate-specific technological and design choices can lead 
to measurable efficiency gains [159]. Options to increase rates of snow shedding and/or de-
crease the impact of snow shading fall into the following categories: 
• 
Module architecture (e.g., frame vs frameless, cell stringing, etc.) 
• 
Module technology (cell size, cell design, bifacial vs mono-facial) 
• 
System design (module orientation; height above ground; tilt angle; clip design and 
placement) 
The choices described below are of greatest relevance to commercial and utility-scale instal-
lations; residential rooftop PV is also considered but not discussed at depth because the de-
sign options there are more limited. 
 
7.6.1 Module Architecture 
The intense focus in recent years on increasing the performance efficiency of PV modules has 
led to a proliferation of module technologies and designs. This section describes what is known 
about the performance of different module designs in snowy climates and lays out areas where 
more research is needed. 
1. Frame Design 
Module frames can function as snow dams, creating resistance that – depending on snow 
depth, ambient air temperature and irradiance – will slow the momentum of sliding snow and 
cause it to compact on the lower portion of the module, further obstructing the sliding process 
[170]. Although module orientation, form factor, snow depth, ambient air temperature and irra-
diance are contributing factors, even a low-profile frame morphology will obstruct the sliding of 
snow [171]. The discontinuity of a frame protruding even a few millimetres above the cover 
glass can provide a foothold for snow and ice. The greater the weight of snow above the bottom 
of the frame relative to the frame length, the less likely it is that an accumulation along the 
bottom edge will be able to support the weight of snow above it. 
What is not clear is whether there are quantifiable differences attributable to a specific frame 
morphology (e.g., a bevelled edge) or frame colour, but these differences should be studied. 
What is clear is that frameless modules can, under the right climate conditions, shed snow 
more quickly than framed modules. One recent study demonstrated that an array of frameless 
modules produced 13% more energy than framed – but otherwise identical – modules in the 
month of December. More research is underway to better understand the role of ambient air 
temperature, which affects the rate of shedding, with the difference between the two arrays 
shrinking as temperatures drop, likely attributable to a higher surface adhesion at lower tem-
peratures. Another study showed that snow, when shed quickly from the frameless panels, will 
form mounds on the ground. These mounds, in turn, support ever bigger mounds that can 
eventually obstruct the lower row of modules. By contrast, the mounds under the adjacent 
framed modules are much smaller, not only because some snow is retained on the lower edge 
of the modules but because a certain amount is removed via wind or melting before it ever 
reaches the ground [170]. 

<<<PAGE 101>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
101 
 
 
Figure 53: Framed vs. frameless modules side-by-side PV arrays demonstrate the im-
pact of a module frame on snow shedding. Frameless modules (right) generated 13% 
more energy in the month of December than the adjacent framed modules. The modules 
were virtually identical except for the presence or absence of a frame [170]. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 54: Difference in snow shedding and energy output are shown for the adjacent 
framed and frameless modules. As shown in the graph on the left, the framed modules 
begin shedding snow almost an hour before the framed modules, a difference that is 
reflected in the power-output graph on the right [170]. 
Other factors must also be considered. Installation costs, for example, may be higher if taller 
racks are needed to avoid ground build-up. In addition, the frameless modules require more 
delicate handling during installation, which may also increase costs, especially for utility-scale 
installations. Moreover, frameless modules may have reliability issues, as they may be less 
resistant to the weight of larger snow loads and they may be more vulnerable in the long term 
to moisture ingress. That said, framed modules have their own reliability challenges: water can 
freeze under the frame, putting expansion pressure on both the frame and module glass. Un-
der heavy snow loads, the load on the lower edge of the module can cause the frame to shear 
from the module [172]. As more is learned about the thermo-mechanical stress on modules 
from cold and snow, including its spatial distribution, opportunities to improve the frame design 
will likely arise. Possibilities include materials substitution, e.g., a composite instead of alumin-
ium, or some type of stabilizing back bar. 
2. Form Factor 
Larger-format modules have a greater glass-to-frame ratio than smaller modules, and there-
fore have less sliding resistance, but their larger surface area also creates stress vulnerabilities 
that should be investigated across a range of thermo-mechanical loading conditions. 
 
 

<<<PAGE 102>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
102 
3. 
 Cover Glass Texture and Coatings 
The use of smooth versus textured cover glass is known to improve angle-of-incidence losses 
and, by reducing surface roughness, is likely to increase rates of snow shedding. However, 
further investigation is needed. The application of a snow-phobic surface film, or coating, rep-
resents another opportunity for improving shedding performance, but such coatings will need 
to have high optical transmissivity and sufficient durability to withstand the friction from sliding 
snow. 
 
7.6.2 Solar-Cell Innovation 
The solar industry is experiencing rapid technological change driven by the desire for higher-
efficiency modules and lower-cost products. While the innovation taking place is not motivated 
by the operating climate per se but on cost reductions, many of the changes have implications 
for northern climates that regularly see snow. These changes are briefly discussed in this sec-
tion. 
Cell Size 
Si-wafer based PV technology accounted for about 95% of the total production in 2019. The 
result of Mono-crystalline silicon solar cells is experiencing a growth phase, with ever-larger 
wafer sizes being introduced into the marketplace in order to boost the maximum power rating 
of modules and gain production efficiencies. More than 10 years ago, the prevailing cell size 
was 125 mm x 125 mm; by 2010, so-called M1 cells (156 mm x 156 mm) were becoming 
popular, followed within a few years by M2 wafers (156.75 mm x 156.75 mm); today, even 
larger sizes are emerging (157 mm x 157 mm) and an M6 cell (166 mm x 166 mm) is on the 
horizon. 
But as cell size increases, negative resistive losses also increase, resulting in decreased power 
output. Manufacturers have compensated by moving to half-cut cells to reduce cell-to-module 
losses. The impact of these technological trends, combined with the shift to thinner wafers, 
has introduced questions regarding the wafers’ increased sensitivity to the combined stressors 
of cold temperatures and snow load. For example, research shows that cell fragility is inversely 
proportional to temperature, with cell cracking more likely to occur, especially with snow weight 
on the module, as temperatures fall below freezing [173]. But this work needs to be expanded 
to emerging technologies and across a broader spectrum of thermo-mechanical-load scenar-
ios. 
Half-cut and Shingled Cells 
In the past two years, the solar industry has shown significant interest in half-cut cells, which 
have six strings instead of the traditional four, allowing for higher voltage and more resistance 
to shading. On one hand, half-cut-cell modules may be the optimal choice for snowy climates 
because the new modules outperform traditional modules in portrait orientation when the lower 
half is shaded. On the other hand, half-cut cells, which are partially cut, may prove to be sus-
ceptible to cell cracking under heavy snow loads and/or extreme cold temperatures. Given the 
expected market penetration of half-cut cells, field data from installed systems at northern lat-
itudes are needed. 
Shingled solar cells are silicon cells that are cut into multiple parts (typically 3 or 4) and overlaid 
like rooftop shingles, inter-connected with electrically conductive paste. The shingling ap-
proach is seen as having several advantages: the cut cells are partially overlaid, allowing for 
better area utilization; the shingles are connected electrically with conductive adhesive paste, 

<<<PAGE 103>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
103 
eliminating the need for busbars and reducing shading losses; shingled modules also lack 
soldered ribbons, which are a known point of failure; and they can be wired in parallel, resulting 
in high shade-tolerance, depending on orientation. Yet to be thoroughly investigated, however, 
is how shingled cells perform when thermo-mechanically stressed in winter, especially if bus-
bar failure is a non-issue and the shingled cells are supported by each other. 
Bifacial versus Mono-facial 
The rapid growth of the bifacial PV market can be explained by the relatively low cost of bifacial 
modules and their perceived advantages. Nowhere are those advantages more apparent than 
in northern regions where snow may persist on the ground for months, creating a high-albedo 
operating environment. One advantage of bifacial modules is that the backside does not get 
covered by snow, so it is possible to produce even when the front side is shaded by snow. 
Shading from the mounting structure might be an issue, but most racking companies are now 
designing racks specifically for bifacial systems. 
Early studies have shown that bifacial gains in winter can be considerable, and that an outside-
the-box approach to bifacial system designs may be warranted. A field study of east-west fac-
ing vertical bifacial PV arrays in Alaska, for example, demonstrated that the vertical arrays 
generated from 5-20% more energy than traditional designs, produced two energy peaks per 
day that aligned well with electric loads, and had almost no snow shading [174]. 
A second study of bifacial performance on a dual-axis tracker in Vermont also had impressive 
results. In this case, the tracker’s string of bifacial modules outperformed the adjacent string 
of mono-facial modules by 14% over the course of a year, with highest gains in winter, as 
shown in Figure 55. The findings from this experiment suggest that a two-axis tracker, which 
maximizes irradiance normal to the array, also allows for a large optical capture area on the 
backside. The study demonstrated that bifacial modules will shed snow at a faster rate than 
monofacial modules, likely because the increased backside irradiance increases the module 
temperature [159]. 
 
 
Figure 55: String of bifacial modules installed next to a string of mono-facial modules, 
on a two-axis tracker, showed an average annual energy gain of 14% compared with the 
monofacial modules [159]. 
 
 
 

<<<PAGE 104>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
104 
7.6.3 System Design 
Tilt Angle 
Tilt angles tend to roughly correlate with latitude (hence the term “latitude tilt”), with fixed-tilt 
angles in far northern utility- and commercial-scale installations as high as 45°. Choice of tilt 
angle is generally based on angle-of-incidence and inter-row shading calculations. In Sweden, 
for example, the optimal tilt for a latitude of 60N is from 40-45 degrees, assuming the array is 
facing due south. To date, little attention has been paid to the impact of tilt angle on snow 
shedding, as it reflects multiple variables that are being researched but are not yet well under-
stood [100]. However, this study indicated that annual energy losses decreased dramatically, 
from 34% to 5%, as tilt angle increased from zero to 45 degrees for unobstructed systems. 
Module Orientation 
Module orientation is thought to contribute to snow shedding, but this assumption needs to be 
better quantified. Preliminary work suggests that the length of vertical glass relative to the 
length of the horizontal frame allows for greater sliding momentum that will propel snow beyond 
the frame edge. For this reason, mounting modules with their shorter dimension parallel to the 
ground – in portrait rather than landscape configuration – is thought to encourage snow shed-
ding, but module stringing and the location of bypass diodes must also be taken into account 
[160]. 
 
Figure 56: Two adjacent PV systems set at the same tilt angle but with different module 
orientations create an ideal experimental set-up for investigating the impact of orienta-
tion on snow shedding. As shown above, orientation can impact shedding rates, alt-
hough more research is needed to investigate temperature-dependency and the role of 
bypass diodes [160]. 
Module Clips 
Both inter-modules spacing on a rack and the location, size, and profile of module clips can 
have a measurable impact on snow shedding. Snow that builds up in the several centimetres 
of space between adjacent modules creates a physical impediment that can hinder further 
sliding; similarly, clips can function as snow dams, holding snow on the module surface that 
can shade all three module strings. An example of the clip effect can be seen in Figure 57. The 

<<<PAGE 105>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
105 
influence of the module frame and other design features on snow shedding are discussed in 
the previous section. 
 
Figure 57: Module clips. The photo demonstrates how a module clip can create a phys-
ical barrier that prevents snow from sliding from the module surface. 
Array Height 
Height is another important contributor to snow losses. If a PV array is set too close to the 
ground, and if snow sheds too quickly and/or too often, and without significant melting, snow 
will accumulate on the ground, forming piles that can engulf the PV array, reducing its power 
output and introducing reliability concerns, from mechanical loading to moisture ingress. 
Providing a clearance of at least a meter between the array and ground gives space for snow 
to accumulate without reaching the lower edge of the array, although the elevation should also 
take local snow and wind conditions into account. In cases with inadequate clearance, such 
as roof-mounted modules, or even ground-mounted systems that experience extreme snow 
events, snow will build up at the bottom of the module frame but is something to generally be 
avoided (see Figure 58). 
That said, more research is needed in this area to determine the trade-offs regarding engi-
neering and installation costs of higher racks versus the energy lost from snow build-up from 
the ground. 
Ground-Mounted Systems 
In northern regions where snow accumulates throughout the four to six months of winter and 
the ground freezes to a depth of two metres or more, most PV installations are seasonal ac-
tivities owing to the cost and complexity of winter installations. Even then, installing the foun-
dations for array-racking in cold climates can be difficult depending on whether the terrain is 
rock, permafrost, or a mixture of sand and clay. Also concerning is the height of the water 
table, which can create frost heaves in winter, thus requiring relatively deep pile-driven posts. 
If frost heaves are a concern, foundations should extend below the frost level; otherwise, the 
pilings may shift as the soil expands and contracts during seasonal freeze and thaw. 
For sites with permafrost, foundations can be anchored directly into the frozen soil, assuming 
the permafrost is stable and shows no signs of melting. A thawed layer of soil can be excavated 
during the summer down to the permafrost layer. Exposed to the ambient air, a 30 cm depth 
of permafrost will thaw and can be removed creating a cavity into which a steel platform can 
be installed and topped with insulating foam. The excavation is then filled in and the entire 
structure becomes bolted to the permafrost [3]. 

<<<PAGE 106>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
106 
 
Figure 58: Insufficient elevation of a PV array can result in snow build-up from the 
ground that prevents further snow sliding. 
Tracking Systems 
Trackers, both single- and dual-axis, represent yet another approach to reducing snow losses. 
They can be tilted and/or stowed to minimize snow adhesion and/or accelerate snow shedding. 
But trackers require motors and controls, both of which add complexity and reliability chal-
lenges, especially in cold operating environments. Also unknown is whether snow load, com-
bined with tracker movement, can stress the solar cells, especially at sub-freezing tempera-
tures, resulting in cell cracking [175]. 
Residential Rooftop PV 
In contrast, the concern for residential rooftop PV is twofold, depending on the placement of 
the array relative to the rest of the roof: 1) snow can shed abruptly, creating a mini-avalanche 
that poses a danger and 2) snow may shed from the modules but then adhere to the roofing 
substrate, creating a snow dam that prevents further shedding. To mitigate safety concerns, 
some PV companies advocate implementation of a snow guard, or physical barrier, which can 
be installed along the edge of the roof. In Sweden, snowguard placing is recommended 80 cm 
from the PV system [176]. 
Other options that may favour the shedding of snow include the installation of frameless mod-
ules and rooftop PV systems that are integrated or semi-integrated into the roof, lowering the 
array’s profile and therefore reducing resistance to sliding. Solar roof tiles could be another 
option, although they are still not mainstream and their long-term reliability in harsh winter 
conditions is not yet established. 
Power Electronics 
Cold climates may exacerbate thermal cycling and create condensation inside electronic de-
vices leading to performance drift or short-circuits. Circuits cooled by natural convection and 
radiation are preferable to fan-cooled devices, since fans may fail at low temperature and com-
ponent replacement in remote locations is difficult. Electronics encased in epoxy should be 
pretested over a range of temperatures to ensure the difference in coefficients of thermal ex-
pansion does not cause undue stress. Liquid-crystal displays may work poorly in cold condi-
tions. Inverters or charge controllers should ideally be in a dry sheltered environment, such as 
a nearby building; if not possible, they should be hung on the back of the PV rack, which will 
provide some shelter. However, batteries should be stored separately due to the possibility of 
generating corrosive vapours or hydrogen gas. Also, inverters and charge controllers also 

<<<PAGE 107>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
107 
need to be sized appropriately. The voltage of a c-Si module increases with decreasing tem-
perature. Voltage dependence on temperature is most strongly affected by the dark saturation 
current, which in turn shows a temperature dependence on the intrinsic carrier concentration. 
While open-circuit voltage rises, short-circuit current decreases slightly at lower temperatures 
due to bandgap widening. Maximum power and open-circuit voltage improve by 0.3% to 0.5%, 
while short-circuit current drops by around 0.04% to 0.06% for every degree below standard 
test conditions of 25°C. The overall effect on performance at low temperature is a power gain 
and a slight improvement in fill factor. For example, a crystalline silicon array operating at an 
average temperature of 0°C will generate approximately 10% more power than an array oper-
ating at 25°C, for equal solar irradiance [4]. 

<<<PAGE 108>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
108 
 CONCLUSION 
This report summarises the current state of the still-evolving field of soiling, closing the loop 
from physical and chemical mechanisms to measurement, modelling, economic impacts, and 
mitigation. In a nod to the growing popularity and viability of installations in high latitude re-
gions, dedicated sections on snow soiling are also included. This report addresses both min-
eral dust particle and snow-induced shading of installations, but not anthropogenic, zoological 
or biological sources of PV system yield loss, such as diesel exhaust, bird droppings, moss, 
lichens, etc. 
Particles in the range of 2 µm to 63 µm are found to be the main contributors to soiling in arid 
regions. Normally, such particles are water-soluble and can be removed relatively easily. How-
ever, under the influence of high humidity with subordinate phases of dryness, adhesion can 
increase greatly and require professional cleaning. 
Soiling is also found to be highly heterogeneous, and monitoring of soiling in large-scale sys-
tems should therefore be conducted in multiple locations – as described in the monitoring 
standard for PV systems, IEC 61724. Regular cleaning of the irradiation sensors is also oblig-
atory to avoid misinterpretation of performance data. When choosing soiling sensors, it is im-
portant to consider how easily such devices can be integrated into the system's monitoring 
infrastructure. An ideal solution should be installable with as little maintenance as possible and 
be able to detect heterogeneous soiling at both module and site level with high accuracy. 
In the field of soiling metrics prediction, there are different models that can be divided into 
several classes, from semi-physical models to those that use AI methods. Their common fea-
ture is that they are very often limited to a local test area and are difficult to generalise. Globally 
applicable models for predicting soiling rates based on satellite data are currently quite crude. 
Energy losses predicted by emerging snow models as predictors for soiling phenomenon in 
high latitudes also show that more work and validation is still needed to understand the causes 
of discrepancy between the models and with empirical data. 
Studies suggest that soiling of PV installations may already have caused a loss in annual PV 
energy production worldwide of at least 3% to 4% in 2018, corresponding to economic losses 
of up to three to five billion euros. Despite lower component costs and thus lower CAPEX, 
increasing absolute losses must be assumed, as PV installations will continue to expand in all 
regions. 
On a global level, these economic consequences are immense. Techno-economic models, as 
described in Chapters 4 and 5, provide decision-making support for O&M companies. Cleaning 
decision timelines, especially for large plants, should be based on sound on-site monitoring, 
rather than on predefined operation and maintenance schedules, to minimise the costs of 
cleaning operations. Especially for large power plants in arid regions with correspondingly high 
soiling rates, the trend is clearly towards robotic or semi-robotic cleaning. 
Technological advancements and lower component costs are also making PV systems in-
creasingly attractive at higher latitudes (and altitudes), despite winter season stresses on sys-
tems caused by snow cover and low temperatures. Ongoing research projects are aimed at 
improvements in component reliability, predictive modelling and system design optimisation. 
To mitigate production losses, promising considerations for high latitude solar installations in-
clude frameless modules, steeper tilt angles, snow-shedding coatings, bifacial modules, and 
attention to array heights to minimize snow accumulation on the bottom edges of modules, 
among other factors. 

<<<PAGE 109>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
109 
In conclusion, PV soiling will continue to be a global issue, which is expected to be exacerbated 
by climate change with rising global temperatures and subsequent droughts. Further advance-
ments in soiling modelling, adaptation and mitigation are critically necessary to help PV oper-
ators maximize their power generation and economic gains, in spite of the challenges posed 
by soiling. 

<<<PAGE 110>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
110 
APPENDIX 1: PARTICLE COMPOSITION AND SOLUBIL-
ITY 
Table 11: List of some compound families with examples of their salts and possible or-
igins. 
 
Chemical com-
pounds 
minerals family 
Examples 
of salts 
formula 
most likely origins 
Nitrates 
Sodium Ni-
trate 
𝑁𝑎𝑁𝑂3 
atmospheric (Ozone + Nitrogen + Ox-
ygen) 
industry or intensive agriculture or 
road traffic 
Potassium 
Nitrate 
𝐾𝑁𝑂3 
Acetates 
Calcium Ac-
etate 
𝐶𝑎(𝐶2𝐻3𝑂2)2 
Polymers industry 
Potassium 
Acetate 
𝐾(𝐶2𝐻3𝑂2) 
Sulfates 
Gypsum 
𝐶𝑎𝑆𝑂4 2(𝐻2𝑂) 
Evaporite 
Alteration of sulphide 
Fumarole 
Smogs (𝐻2𝑂 + 𝑆𝑂2 + 𝑁𝑂2) 
 
Potassium 
Sulfates 
𝐾𝑆𝑂4 
Sodium 
Sulfates 
𝑁𝑎2𝑆𝑂4 
Mirabilite or Thénardite industrial ex-
traction 
Industrial production of chlorhydric 
acid, ... 
Ammonium 
Sulfate 
(𝑁𝐻4)2𝑆𝑂4 
Mascagnite industrial extraction 
Intensive agriculture 
Industrial production 
(𝑁𝐻4)2𝐶𝑂3 + 𝐶𝑎𝑆𝑂4 →(𝑁𝐻4)2𝑆𝑂4 + 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑂3 
Chlorate 
Sodium 
Chlorate 
𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙𝑂3 
Intensive agriculture 
Industrial production 
Magnesium 
Chlorate 
𝑀𝑔(𝐶𝐼𝑂3)2 

<<<PAGE 111>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
111 
 
Cementation is not a simple drying of the paste after adding water, but a complex set of chem-
ical hydration reactions allowing the cement paste to pass from the liquid state to the solid 
state. 
The famous Portland Cement, the basic ingredient of concrete, is a good example which can 
illustrate the hydration process. The study of the chemical reactions involved artificially disso-
ciates the different mechanisms. In practice, these mechanisms take place simultaneously. 
• 
Silicates Hydration: In this cement tricalcium silicates (Ca3O5Si and dicalcium sili-
cates (Ca2O2Si) dissolve as ions which interacts with each other and forms silicates 
of hydrated calcium (CaO)1.7(SiO4)(H2O)4) and portlandite (Ca(OH)2). The hydrated 
calcium has the same characteristics of a gel. This is the tangle of this gel which 
gives the cement’s robustness. The hydrates calcium molecules grow on the sur-
faces of non hydrated grains and fill the capillary interstices between those grains. 
After a few hours, the layer around the grain is thick enough to slow down the diffu-
sion of water and ions towards the anhydrics components. The hydration slows but 
the process can still continue for months or years. 
• 
Aluminate’s hydration: tricalcium aluminate (CaO3Al2O3) is the more reactive com-
pound with water. The reactions are carried out in several steps 
o 
Step 1: Aluminates react with gypsum to form ettringite 
(CaO)6(Al2O3)(SO3)3,32H2O. A hydrates layer is covering the aluminates forming 
a protective cover all around the grain. 
o 
Step 2: When gypsum is exhausted, the sulfates concentration of the solution 
decreases. Ettringite become unstable and dissolve to form hydrated calcium 
monosulfate named AFm (CaO)3(Al2O3)(CaSO4),12H2O 
o 
Step 3: After a couple of weeks, ettringite has transformed totally in AFm. Over 
one month, reactions carry out slowly with aluminate and aluminoferrite to form 
aluminoferrite of hydrated calcium 
The complex mechanisms behind the creation of the various hydration products that are sili-
cates and aluminates are adsorption, hydrolysis, dissolution, solvation and crystallisation. This 
conclusion is probably similar for most of the soiling cementation mechanisms. 
 
Silicate-Phyllosili-
cate 
Palygorskite 
(𝑀𝑔, 𝐴𝑙)2𝑆𝑖4𝑂10 
(𝑂𝐻) 4(𝐻2𝑂) 
Attapulgite clay industrial extraction 
Kaolinite 
𝐴𝑙2𝑆𝑖2𝑂5(𝑂𝐻)4 
Natural alteration of mica, or feld-
spaths due to water, carbonic gas or 
organic acids. 
Halide 
Halite 
Sodium 
Chlorid 
𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 
Salt marshes 
Halite industrial extraction 

<<<PAGE 112>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
112 
APPENDIX 2: DUST COMPOSITION SURVEY 
Table 12 Some examples of dust composition for samples sieved below 38 µm from 
[37]. PSDA analysis is from [30]. 
Locality 
 
Major 20-100% 
Minor 5-20% 
Trace <5% 
Spain 
las Canarias 
La Mala 
29°05’50.50”N 
13°27’43.92”W 
 
Calcite1, 
Quartz2a 
Illite2c 
Plagioclase2b , 
Aragonite1, 
Dolomite1, 
Hematite3 
La Mala 
29°05’49.79”N 
13°27’44.83”W 
Calcite1, 
 
Quartz2a 
Plagioclase2b, 
Aragonite1 
Dolomite1, 
Hematite1 
Halite3 
Mirador del Rio 
29°13’39.86”N 
13°28’20.92W 
Quartz2a, 
Illite2c 
Calcite1, 
Plagioclase2b, 
Dolomite1, 
Kaolinite2c 
Hematite4 
Vega de femes 
28°55’22.71°N 
13°45’52.71W 
Illite2c 
Biotite2c, 
Quartz2a, 
Plagioclase2b, 
Microcline2b 
Calcite1, 
Goethie5 
Hematite4, 
Illite2c 
Kaolinite2c 
Chile 
Atacama Yungay 
25°56’56.89”S 
70°27’45.81”W 
Quartz2a 
Illite2c 
Anhydrite6 
Plagioclase2b 
Amphibole2d 
Gypsum6 
Montmorillo-
nite2c 
PSDA* Antofa-
gasta 
 
Quartz2a 
Anorthite2a 
Orthoclase2b 
Albite2b 
Gypsum6 
USA 
Arizona road 
undisclosed 
Quartz2a 
 
Plagioclase2b, 
 K-feldspar 
(Orthoclase2b) 
Yuma AZ 
32°52’27.06”N 
114°12’31.84W 
Quartz2a, 
Plagioclase2b 
Calcite1, 
Muscovite2c, 
Kaolinite2c 
Dolomite1 
Montmorillo-
nite2c, 

<<<PAGE 113>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
113 
where in this table, the superscript upon each mineral refers to the Strunz mineral classifica-
tion: 
• 
1Carbonates 
• 
2aSilicates:Tectosilicates 
• 
2bSilicates:Tectosilates:Feldspathic 
• 
2cSilicates:Phyllosilicates 
• 
2dSilicates:Inosilicates 
• 
4Oxydes 
• 
6Sulfates 
• 
7Halide 
 
Gypsum6 
Yuma AZ 
32°51’48.62”N 
114°10’50.72”W 
Quartz2a, 
Calcite1 
Plagioclase2b, 
Muscovite2c 
Kaolinite2c, 
K-feldspar (Or-
thoclase2b, 
Dolomite1 
FT.Carson CO 
38°42’30.79N 
104°47’10.56’W 
Quartz2a, 
Plagioclase2b 
Muscovite2c, 
Kaolinite2c, 
Dolomite1 
Calcite1 
Dugway UT, 
40°11’30.10”N 
113°09’50.05”W 
Quartz2a, 
Calcite1 
Dolomite1, 
Plagioclase2b, 
Aragonite1 
Muscovite2c, 
K-feldspar (Or-
thoclase2b), 
Hematite1 
Morocco 
Lake Iriki 
29°50’17.02”N 
06°30’44.51”W 
Quartz2a, 
Illite2c 
Calcite1 
Kaolinite2c 
Dolomite1 
Iraq 
Camp Victory 
33°15’17.09N 
44°13’26.87”E 
Quartz2a, 
Calcite1 
Kaolinite2c 
Plagioclase2b, 
Dolomite1 
Amphibole2d, 
Montmorillo-
nite2c, 
Halite7, 
Palygorskite2c 

<<<PAGE 114>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
114 
APPENDIX 3: MACROSCOPIC, CONTROLLABLE AND MI-
CROSCOPIC FACTORS INFLUENCING SOILING 
Microscopic Approach 
The first step of the microscopic approach aims to characterize the dust samples so as to 
determine the size distribution and the mineral composition of the dust. The separation of large-
grain materials from hundredths of a millimetre to two to three mm is done using a sieve anal-
ysis. Separation of smaller particles is done by hydraulic method based on either the difference 
in the speed of sedimentation of particles of different sizes in water or on the ability of water 
jets flowing at different speeds to draw off particles of different sizes. The samples can be 
soaked in water to avoid disaggregation. Alternatively, aggregates may be broken down by 
boiling and treating samples with various agents. In order to prevent coagulation of the sus-
pension during the analysis, stabilizers are added. Another method is laser diffraction (LD). 
This is a widely used technique for particle sizing from hundreds of nanometres to several 
millimetres. Laser diffraction measures particle size distribution by measuring the angular var-
iation in intensity of light scattered as a laser beam passes through a dispersed particulate 
sample. Large particles scatter light at small angles relative to the laser beam and small parti-
cles scatter light at large angles. Using Mie light scattering theory, the angular scattering in-
tensity data are analyzed to calculate the size of the particles forming the scattering pattern. 
The particle size is reported as a volume equivalent sphere diameter as shown in the Figure 
59. 
 
 
Figure 59: Size distribution of one dust sample performed by one Mastersizer 3000 in-
strument. 
The second step of the microscopic approach aims to determine the mineral composition of 
the dust. This analysis can be performed by X-Ray Diffraction (XRD). Figure 60 shows one 
diffractogram obtained using a Panalytical Aeris instrument accompanied by the X’pert 
Highscore software and the PDF-4 database allowing the peaks to be assigned to the corre-
sponding compounds. 

<<<PAGE 115>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
115 
 
Figure 60: Diffractogram with compounds identified. 
Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX) is performed to reveal the presence and quantities of atomic 
elements. Even if it does not specify directly which compound, this result eliminates many 
mineral possibilities. EDX is coupled with Scanning Electron Microscopy, and as a conse-
quence the EDX result is accurately localized on the dust sample. The high magnification im-
age also gives a clear view on the shape and of the arrangement of the various dust com-
pounds. Figure 61 shows one big (10 µm) crystallized mineral surrounded by smaller (one µm) 
ones, which illustrate the caking effect. The EDX measurement concentrated on a part of this 
mineral (red point) reveals the strong presence of Ca and Sulfur atomic elements. These two 
elements are in the chemical formula for Calcium sulfate (CaSO4) which could demonstrate 
the presence of Gypsum or Anhydrite. This assumption should be confirmed by XRD or TEM 
(Transmission Electron Microscopy) or other visual inspections. 
 
Figure 61: (left) SEM image; (right) corresponding EDX result. 
Macroscopic Approach 
The macroscopic approach consists in observing the influence of meteorological phenomena 
at the same time as the aerosol concentration. This approach can be applied at several levels 
depending on the accuracy of the information sought. 
• 
In the context of multi-annual estimates, the induced loss can be quantified by taking 
into account only the average annual concentration of PM10 particles (airborne below 
10 µm) suspended in the air, and the rainfall frequency. This approach generates un-
certainties of several percent and consequently the means and resources required in 
the targeted area. 
b) 
a) 

<<<PAGE 116>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
116 
• 
In the construction of a new power plant, it is necessary to consider other meteorolog-
ical parameters. A study [1] in Qatar has shown good correlations, taking into account 
wind speed and humidity, when one disregards exceptional events such as sand-
storms. 
• 
In order to plan cleaning or protection actions, it is mandatory to take into account ad-
ditional parameters such as wind direction. Certain winds may contain more dust than 
others. 
Controllable Approach 
The controllable approach focuses on the configurations of the plant and its solar panels as 
well as the methods applied to maximize cleanliness. The major influencing factors are: 
• 
Orientation of the strings of panels and choice of technology by comparing, for exam-
ple, a south-facing array (northern hemisphere) or north-facing array (southern hemi-
sphere) with an East-West orientation with bifacial technology. 
• 
Nature of the soil, presence of particles which can be resuspended, and which can 
therefore cover the modules. 
• 
Electrical architecture in the case of a very localized soiling therefore source of “mis 
match”. 
• 
Evolution of the soil albedo linked to dust in the case of the bifacial. 
• 
Effect of tilt angle: A horizontal module will be soiled by relatively large particles, while 
a steeply tilted module will be soiled by smaller particles. 
• 
Modules temperature: this parameter strongly influences the initial bonding and accu-
mulation process. 
• 
The surface coating of the modules: the particle size distribution influences the initial 
adhesion; the hydrophobic or hydrophilic characteristics will directly condition the ce-
mentation and self-cleaning processes. 
 
 

<<<PAGE 117>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
117 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
W. Javed, B. Guo and B. Figgis, “Modeling of photovoltaic soiling loss as a function of environmental 
variables,” Solar Energy, vol. 157, p. 397–407, 2017. 
[2] 
L. Micheli, D. Ruth and M. Muller, “Seasonal Trends of Soiling on Photovoltaic Systems: Preprint,” Golden, 
CO: National Renewable Energy Laboratory. NREL/CP-5J00-68673. , 2017. 
[3] 
L. Micheli, M. G. Deceglie and M. Muller, “Predicting photovoltaic soiling losses using environmental 
parameters: An update,” Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, vol. 27, no. 3, p. 210–219, 
2019. 
[4] 
M. Gostein, K. Passow, M. G. Deceglie and L. Micheli, “Local Variability in PV Soiling Rate,” in 2018 IEEE 
7th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion (WCPEC 2018), Waikoloa Village, Hawaii, USA, 
2018. 
[5] 
K. Ilse, M. Werner, V. Naumann, B. W. Figgis, C. Hagendorf and J. Bagdahn, “Microstructural analysis of 
the cementation process during soiling on glass surfaces in arid and semi‐arid climates,” physica status 
solidi (RRL) – Rapid Research Letters, vol. Volume 10, no. Issue 7, pp. 525-529, 2016. 
[6] 
K. Ilse, L. Micheli, B. W. Figgis, K. Lange, D. Daßler, H. Hanifi, F. Wolfertstetter, V. Naumann, C. 
Hagendorf, R. Gottschalg and J. Bagdahn, “Techno-Economic Assessment of Soiling Losses and 
Mitigation Strategies for Solar Power Generation,” Joule, vol. 3, no. 10, p. 2303–2321, 2019. 
[7] 
L. L. Kazmerski, Diniz, Antonia Sonia A. C., C. Brasil Maia, M. Machado Viana, S. C. Costa, P. P. Brito, C. 
Dias Campos, L. V. Machado Neto, S. Morais Hanriot and L. R. Oliveira Cruz, “Fundamental studies of the 
adhesion of dust to PV module chemical and physical relationships at the microscale,” in 2015 IEEE 42nd 
Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), New Orleans, LA, USA, IEEE, 2015, p. 1–7. 
[8] 
A. Sayyah, M. N. Horenstein and M. K. Mazumder, “Energy yield loss caused by dust deposition on 
photovoltaic panels,” Solar Energy, vol. 107, p. 576–604, 2014. 
[9] 
G. P. Smestad, T. A. Germer, H. Alrashidi, E. F. Fernández, S. Dey, H. Brahma, N. Sarmah, A. Ghosh, N. 
Sellami, I. A. I. Hassan, M. Desouky, A. Kasry, B. Pesala, S. Sundaram, F. Almonacid, K. S. Reddy, T. K. 
Mallick and L. Micheli, “Modelling photovoltaic soiling losses through optical characterization,” SCIENTIFIC 
REPORTS, vol. 10, no. 1, 2020. 
[10] M. Köntges, S. Kurtz, C. E. Packard, U. Jahn, K. Berger, K. Kato, T. Friesen, H. Liu, M. Van Iseghem, J. 
Wohlgemuth, D. Miller, M. Kempe, P. Hacke, F. Reil, N. Bogdanski, W. Herrmann, C. Buerhop Lutz and G. 
Friesen, “Review of Failures of Photovoltaic Modules,” ISBN 987 3 906042 16 9, Report IEA PVPS T13 
01:2014. 
[11] S. C. Costa, A. S. A. Diniz and L. L. Kazmerski, “Dust and soiling issues and impacts relating to solar 
energy systems: Literature review update for 2012–2015,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 
vol. 63, p. 33–61, 2016. 
[12] T. Sarver, A. Al-Qaraghuli and L. L. Kazmerski, “A comprehensive review of the impact of dust on the use 
of solar energy: History, investigations, results, literature, and mitigation approaches,” Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 22, p. 698–733, 2013. 

<<<PAGE 118>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
118 
[13] J. Zorrilla-Casanova, M. Piliougine, J. Carretero, P. Bernaola, P. Carpena, L. Mora-Lopez and M. Sidrach-
de-Cardona, “Analysis of Dust Losses in Photovoltaic Modules,” Linköping University Electronic Press, 
2011, p. 2985–2992. 
[14] R. Appels, B. Lefevre, B. Herteleer, H. Goverde, A. Beerten, R. Paesen, K. Medts, J. Driesen and J. 
Poortmans, “Effect of soiling on photovoltaic modules,” Solar Energy, vol. 96, p. 283–291, 2013. 
[15] E. Kymakis, S. Kalykakis and T. M. Papazoglou, “Performance analysis of a grid connected photovoltaic 
park on the island of Crete,” Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 50, no. 3, p. 433–438, 2009. 
[16] A. Massi Pavan, A. Mellit and D. Pieri, “The effect of soiling on energy production for large-scale 
photovoltaic plants,” Solar Energy, vol. 85, no. 5, p. 1128–1136, 2011. 
[17] A. Al-Otaibi, A. Al-Qattan, F. Fairouz and A. Al-Mulla, “Performance evaluation of photovoltaic systems on 
Kuwaiti schools’ rooftop,” Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 95, p. 110–119, 2015. 
[18] H. Qasem, T. R. Betts, H. Müllejans, H. AlBusairi and R. Gottschalg, “Dust-induced shading on 
photovoltaic modules,” Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, vol. 22, no. 2, p. 218–226, 
2014. 
[19] A. P. Bateman, H. Belassein and S. T. Martin, “Impactor Apparatus for the Study of Particle Rebound: 
Relative Humidity and Capillary Forces,” Aerosol Science and Technology, vol. 48, no. 1, p. 42–52, 2014. 
[20] B. Figgis, A. Ennaoui, B. Guo, W. Javed and E. Chen, “Outdoor soiling microscope for measuring particle 
deposition and resuspension,” Solar Energy, vol. 137, p. 158–164, 2016. 
[21] X. Li, D. L. Mauzerall and M. H. Bergin, “Global reduction of solar power generation efficiency due to 
aerosols and panel soiling,” Nature Sustainability, vol. 3, no. 9, p. 720–727, 2020. 
[22] V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M. 
I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J. Matthews, T. K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu 
and B. Zhou, Eds., Climate Change 2021 - The Physical Science Basis, IPCC, 2021: Summary for 
Policymakers., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, p. 
3−32. 
[23] K. K. Ilse, B. W. Figgis, V. Naumann, C. Hagendorf and J. Bagdahn, “Fundamentals of soiling processes 
on photovoltaic modules,” Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 98, p. 239–254, 2018. 
[24] B. S. Yilbas, H. Ali, M. M. Khaled, N. Al-Aqeeli, N. Abu-Dheir and K. K. Varanasi, “Influence of dust and 
mud on the optical, chemical, and mechanical properties of a pv protective glass,” SCIENTIFIC REPORTS, 
vol. 5, p. 15833, 2015. 
[25] S. Mariraj Mohan, “An overview of particulate dry deposition: measuring methods, deposition velocity and 
controlling factors,” International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 387–
402, 2016. 
[26] C. R. Lawrence and J. C. Neff, “The contemporary physical and chemical flux of aeolian dust: A synthesis 
of direct measurements of dust deposition,” Chemical Geology, vol. 267, no. 1-2, p. 46–63, 2009. 
[27] J. F. Kok, E. J. R. Parteli, T. I. Michaels and D. B. Karam, “The physics of wind-blown sand and dust,” 
Reports on progress in physics. Physical Society (Great Britain), vol. 75, no. 10, p. 106901, 2012. 
[28] P. Ferrada, D. Olivares, V. del Campo, A. Marzo, F. Araya, E. Cabrera, J. Llanos, J. Correa-Puerta, C. 
Portillo, D. Román Silva, M. Trigo-Gonzalez, J. Alonso-Montesinos, G. López, J. Polo, F. J. Batlles and E. 

<<<PAGE 119>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
119 
Fuentealba, “Physicochemical characterization of soiling from photovoltaic facilities in arid locations in the 
Atacama Desert,” Solar Energy, vol. 187, p. 47–56, 2019. 
[29] D. Olivares, P. Ferrada, C. Matos, A. Marzo, E. Cabrera, C. Portillo and J. Llanos, “Characterization of 
soiling on PV modules in the Atacama Desert,” Energy Procedia, vol. 124, p. 547–553, 2017. 
[30] B. Figgis, A. Ennaoui, S. Ahzi and Y. Rémond, “Review of PV soiling particle mechanics in desert 
environments,” Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 76, p. 872–881, 2017. 
[31] S. Mekhilef, R. Saidur and M. Kamalisarvestani, “Effect of dust, humidity and air velocity on efficiency of 
photovoltaic cells,” Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 16, no. 5, p. 2920–2925, 2012. 
[32] L. Dorobantu, M. O. Popescu, C. I. Popescu and A. Craciunescu, “The effect of surface impurities on 
photovoltaic panels,” Renewable Energy and Power Quality Journal, p. 622–626, 2011. 
[33] E. Urrejola, J. Antonanzas, P. Ayala, M. Salgado, G. Ramírez-Sagner, C. Cortés, A. Pino and R. Escobar, 
“Effect of soiling and sunlight exposure on the performance ratio of photovoltaic technologies in Santiago, 
Chile,” Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 114, p. 338–347, 2016. 
[34] G. McTainsh and C. Strong, “The role of aeolian dust in ecosystems,” Geomorphology, vol. 89, no. 1-2, p. 
39–54, 2007. 
[35] K. K. Ilse, J. Rabanal, L. Schonleber, M. Z. Khan, V. Naumann, C. Hagendorf and J. Bagdahn, “Comparing 
Indoor and Outdoor Soiling Experiments for Different Glass Coatings and Microstructural Analysis of 
Particle Caking Processes,” IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 203–209, 2018. 
[36] J. P. Engelbrecht, H. Moosmüller, S. Pincock, R. K. M. Jayanty, T. Lersch and G. Casuccio, “Technical 
note: Mineralogical, chemical, morphological, and optical interrelationships of mineral dust re-
suspensions,” Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, vol. 16, no. 17, p. 10809–10830, 2016. 
[37] P. Burton and B. King, “Artificial soiling of photovoltaic module surfaces using traceable soil components,” 
in 2013 IEEE 39th Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), Tampa Bay, FL, USA, IEEE, 2013, pp. 
1542-1545. 
[38] P. D. Burton and B. H. King, “Application and Characterization of an Artificial Grime for Photovoltaic Soiling 
Studies,” IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 299–303, 2014. 
[39] P. Piedra and H. Moosmüller, “Optical losses of photovoltaic cells due to aerosol deposition: Role of 
particle refractive index and size,” Solar Energy, vol. 155, p. 637–646, 2017. 
[40] F. M. Zaihidee, S. Mekhilef, M. Seyedmahmoudian and B. Horan, “Dust as an unalterable deteriorative 
factor affecting PV panel's efficiency: Why and how,” Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 65, 
p. 1267–1278, 2016. 
[41] T. Lombardo, A. Ionescu, A. Chabas, R.-A. Lefèvre, P. Ausset and Y. Candau, “Dose-response function for 
the soiling of silica-soda-lime glass due to dry deposition,” The Science of the total environment, vol. 408, 
no. 4, p. 976–984, 2010. 
[42] A. Chabas, A. Fouqueau, M. Attoui, S. C. Alfaro, A. Petitmangin, A. Bouilloux, M. Saheb, A. Coman, T. 
Lombardo, N. Grand, P. Zapf, R. Berardo, M. Duranton, R. Durand-Jolibois, M. Jerome, E. Pangui, J. J. 
Correia, I. Guillot and S. Nowak, “Characterisation of CIME, an experimental chamber for simulating 
interactions between materials of the cultural heritage and the environment,” Environmental science and 
pollution research international, vol. 22, no. 23, p. 19170–19183, 2015. 

<<<PAGE 120>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
120 
[43] M. Melcher, R. Wiesinger and M. Schreiner, “Degradation of glass artifacts: application of modern surface 
analytical techniques,” Accounts of chemical research, vol. 43, no. 6, p. 916–926, 2010. 
[44] E. F. Cuddihy, “Theoretical considerations of soil retention,” Solar Energy Materials, vol. 3, no. 1-2, p. 21–
33, 1980. 
[45] J. Tomas, “Mechanics of Particle Adhesion, Extended master version of Tomas 2003 and full version of 
review paper of CHISA event,” Prague, 2004. 
[46] C. L. Perkins, M. Muller and L. Simpson, “Laboratory Studies of Particle Cementation and PV module 
Soiling,” in 2017 IEEE 44th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC), Washington D.C., USA, IEEE, 
2017, p. 2294–2297. 
[47] G. Picotti, P. Borghesani, M. E. Cholette and G. Manzolini, “Soiling of solar collectors – Modelling 
approaches for airborne dust and its interactions with surfaces,” Renewable & Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, vol. 81, p. 2343–2357, 2018. 
[48] B. Figgis, A. Nouviaire, Y. Wubulikasimu, W. Javed, B. Guo, A. Ait-Mokhtar, R. Belarbi, S. Ahzi, Y. 
Rémond and A. Ennaoui, “Investigation of factors affecting condensation on soiled PV modules,” Solar 
Energy, vol. 159, p. 488–500, 2018. 
[49] P. Hülsmann, M. Heck and M. Köhl, “Simulation of Water Vapor Ingress into PV-Modules under Different 
Climatic Conditions,” Journal of Materials, vol. 2013, p. 1–7, 2013. 
[50] K. K. Ilse, B. W. Figgis, M. Werner, V. Naumann, C. Hagendorf, H. Pöllmann and J. Bagdahn, 
“Comprehensive analysis of soiling and cementation processes on PV modules in Qatar,” Solar Energy 
Materials and Solar Cells, vol. 186, p. 309–323, 2018. 
[51] M. Gostein, J. R. Caron and B. Littmann, “Measuring soiling losses at utility-scale PV power plants,” in 
2014 IEEE 40th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC), Denver, CO, USA, IEEE, 2014, p. 0885–
0890. 
[52] L. Micheli, M. Muller and S. Kurtz, “Determining the effects of environment and atmospheric parameters on 
PV field performance,” in 2016 IEEE 43rd Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), Portland, OR, 
USA, IEEE, 2016, p. 1724–1729. 
[53] B. Guo, W. Javed, B. W. Figgis and T. Mirza, “Effect of dust and weather conditions on photovoltaic 
performance in Doha, Qatar,” in 2015 First Workshop on Smart Grid and Renewable Energy (SGRE), 
IEEE, 2015, p. 1–6. 
[54] M. Gostein, B. Littmann, J. R. Caron and L. Dunn, “Comparing PV power plant soiling measurements 
extracted from PV module irradiance and power measurements,” in 2013 IEEE 39th Photovoltaic 
Specialists Conference (PVSC), Tampa Bay, FL, USA, IEEE, 2013, p. 3004–3009. 
[55] L. L. Kazmerski, A. S. A. Diniz, D. S. Braga, C. B. Maia, M. M. Viana, S. C. Costa, P. P. Brito, C. D. 
Campos, S. Morais Hanriot and L. R. Oliveira Cruz, “Interrelationships Among Non-Uniform Soiling 
Distributions and PV Module Performance Parameters, Climate Conditions, and Soiling Particle and 
Module Surface Properties,” in 2017 IEEE 44th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC), Washington 
D.C., USA, IEEE, 2017, p. 2307–2311. 
[56] R. K. Jones, A. Baras, A. A. Saeeri, A. Al Qahtani, A. O. Al Amoudi, Y. Al Shaya, M. Alodan and S. A. Al-
Hsaien, “Optimized Cleaning Cost and Schedule Based on Observed Soiling Conditions for Photovoltaic 
Plants in Central Saudi Arabia,” IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 6, no. 3, p. 730–738, 2016. 

<<<PAGE 121>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
121 
[57] A. Kimber , L. Mitchell, S. Nogradi and H. Wenger, “The effect of soiling on large grid-connected 
photovoltaic systems in California and the Southwest region of the United States,” in 2006 IEEE 4th World 
Conference on Photovoltaic Energy, Waikoloa, HI, USA, 2006. 
[58] M. G. Deceglie, M. Muller, Z. Defreitas and S. Kurtz, “A scalable method for extracting soiling rates from 
PV production data,” in 2016 IEEE 43rd Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), Portland, OR, USA, 
IEEE, 2016, p. 2061–2065. 
[59] P. Besson, C. Munoz, G. Ramirez-Sagner, M. Salgado, R. Escobar and W. Platzer, “Long-Term Soiling 
Analysis for Three Photovoltaic Technologies in Santiago Region,” IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 7, 
no. 6, p. 1755–1760, 2017. 
[60] L. Micheli, E. F. Fernandez, M. Muller and F. Almonacid, “Extracting and Generating PV Soiling Profiles for 
Analysis, Forecasting, and Cleaning Optimization,” IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 197–
205, 2020. 
[61] M. Gostein, T. Düster and C. Thumann, “Accurately measuring PV soiling losses with soiling station 
employing module power measurements,” in 2015 IEEE 42nd Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC), 
New Orleans, LA, USA, IEEE, 2015, pp. 2808-2810. 
[62] M. R. Maghami, H. Hizam, C. Gomes, M. A. Radzi, M. I. Rezadad and S. Hajighorbani, “Power loss due to 
soiling on solar panel: A review,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 59, p. 1307–1316, 
2016. 
[63] J. R. Caron and B. Littmann, “Direct Monitoring of Energy Lost Due to Soiling on First Solar Modules in 
California,” IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 336–340, 2013. 
[64] J. Lopez-Garcia, A. Pozza and T. Sample, “Long-term soiling of silicon PV modules in a moderate 
subtropical climate,” Solar Energy, vol. 130, pp. 174-183, 2016. 
[65] W. Herrmann, M. Schweiger, G. Tamizhmani, B. Shisler and C. S. Kamalaksha, “Soiling and self-cleaning 
of PV modules under the weather conditions of two locations in Arizona and South-East India,” in 2015 
IEEE 42nd Photovoltaic Specialist Conference, New Orleans, LA, USA, IEEE, 2015, pp. 1-5. 
[66] M. A. Grammatico and B. W. Littmann, “Quantifying the anti-soiling benefits of anti-reflective coatings on 
first solar cadmium telluride PV modules,” in 2016 IEEE 43rd Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 
Portland, OR, USA, IEEE, 2016, pp. 1697-1701. 
[67] M. Muller, L. Micheli and A. A. Martinez-Morales, “A Method to Extract Soiling Loss Data from Soiling 
Stations with Imperfect Cleaning Schedules,” in 2017 IEEE 44th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference 
(PVSC), Washington D.C., USA, IEEE, 2017, p. 2881–2886. 
[68] C. Schill, S. Brachmann and M. Koehl, “Impact of soiling on IV-curves and efficiency of PV-modules,” Solar 
Energy, vol. 112, p. 259–262, 2015. 
[69] “IEC 60891:2009 Photovoltaic devices - Procedures for temperature and irradiance corrections to 
measured I-V characteristics,” International Electrotechnical Commission, 2009. 
[70] “CR-PVS1: PV Soiling Loss Index RTU (revision: 11/17),” Campbell Scientific, 2017. 
[71] L. Dunn, B. Littmann, J. R. Caron and M. Gostein, “PV module soiling measurement uncertainty analysis,” 
in 2013 IEEE 39th Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), Tampa Bay, FL, USA, IEEE, 2013, pp. 
0658-0663. 

<<<PAGE 122>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
122 
[72] A. Skoczek, T. Sample and E. D. Dunlop, “The results of performance measurements of field-aged 
crystalline silicon photovoltaic modules,” Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, vol. 17, pp. 
227-240, 2009. 
[73] L. Fanni, I. Pola, E. Bura, T. Friesen and D. Chianese, “Investigation of annealing and degradation effects 
on a-Si PV modules in real operating conditions,” in 2009 24th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy 
Conference (EU-PVSEC), Hamburg, Germany, 2009, pp. 3596 - 3599. 
[74] K. Sinapis, G. Papageorgiou, K. Durose, M. van den Donker and W. Folkerts, “Outdoor degradation of 
CdTe modules at open circuit and at maximum power point,” in 2015 IEEE 42nd Photovoltaic Specialists 
Conference, New Orleans, LA, USA, IEEE, 2015, pp. 1-5. 
[75] D. van Velson, “DustIQ Soiling Measurement Instruction Manual,” Kipp and Zonen, Delft, 2018. 
[76] M. Gostein, “Atonometrics white paper: specifying a soiling measurement system,” Atonometrics, Austin, 
2018. 
[77] IEC 61724-1:2017, "Photovoltaic system performance - Part 1: Monitoring", Geneva, Switzerland: 
International Electrical Commission IEC, 2017. 
[78] A. A. Hegazy, “Effect of dust accumulation on solar transmittance through glass covers of plate-type 
collectors,” Renewable Energy, vol. 22, no. 4, p. 525–540, 2001. 
[79] J. Cano, J. J. John, S. Tatapudi and G. TamizhMani, “Effect of tilt angle on soiling of photovoltaic 
modules,” in 2014 IEEE 40th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference, PVSC, Denver, CO, USA, IEEE, 2014, p. 
3174–3176. 
[80] M. Waters, T. Tirumalai, M. Gostein and B. Stueve, “Soiling Rates of PV Modules vs. Thermopile 
Pyranometers,” in 2017 IEEE 44th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC), Washington D.C., USA, 
IEEE, 2017, p. 2923–2925. 
[81] F. Wolfertstetter, K. Pottler, N. Geuder, R. Affolter, A. A. Merrouni, A. Mezrhab and R. Pitz-Paal, 
“Monitoring of Mirror and Sensor Soiling with TraCS for Improved Quality of Ground based Irradiance 
Measurements,” Energy Procedia, vol. 49, p. 2422–2432, 2014. 
[82] C. Chen, “CiteSpace II: Detecting and visualizing emerging trends and transient patterns in scientific 
literature,” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, vol. 57, no. 3, p. 359–
377, 2006. 
[83] L. Boyle, Dissertation: Don’t Soil Your Chances With Solar Energy: Experiments Of Natural Dust 
Accumulation On Solar Modules And The Effect On Light Transmission, University of Colorado, 2015. 
[84] S. Toth, M. Muller, D. C. Miller, H. Moutinho, B. To, L. Micheli, J. Linger, C. Engtrakul, A. Einhorn and L. 
Simpson, “Soiling and cleaning: Initial observations from 5-year photovoltaic glass coating durability study,” 
Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, vol. 185, p. 375–384, 2018. 
[85] B. Guo, W. Javed, S. Khan, B. Figgis and T. Mirza, “Models for Prediction of Soiling-Caused Photovoltaic 
Power Output Degradation Based on Environmental Variables in Doha, Qatar,” Charlotte, North Carolina, 
USA, ASME, 2016, p. V001T08A004. 
[86] S. Pulipaka, F. Mani and R. Kumar, “Modeling of soiled PV module with neural networks and regression 
using particle size composition,” Solar Energy, vol. 123, p. 116–126, 2016. 

<<<PAGE 123>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
123 
[87] L. Micheli and M. Muller, “An investigation of the key parameters for predicting PV soiling losses: Key 
parameters for predicting PV soiling losses,” Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, vol. 
25, no. 4, p. 291–307, 2017. 
[88] R. R. Cordero, A. Damiani, D. Laroze, S. MacDonell, J. Jorquera, E. Sepúlveda, S. Feron, P. Llanillo, F. 
Labbe, J. Carrasco, J. Ferrer and G. Torres, “Effects of soiling on photovoltaic (PV) modules in the 
Atacama Desert,” SCIENTIFIC REPORTS, vol. 8, no. 1, 2018. 
[89] S. You, Y. J. Lim, Y. Dai and C.-H. Wang, “On the temporal modelling of solar photovoltaic soiling: Energy 
and economic impacts in seven cities,” Applied Energy, vol. 228, p. 1136–1146, 2018. 
[90] M. Coello and L. Boyle, “Simple Model for Predicting Time Series Soiling of Photovoltaic Panels,” IEEE 
Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 9, no. 5, p. 1382–1387, 2019. 
[91] M. H. Bergin, C. Ghoroi, D. Dixit, J. J. Schauer and D. T. Shindell, “Large Reductions in Solar Energy 
Production Due to Dust and Particulate Air Pollution,” Environmental Science & Technology Letters, vol. 4, 
no. 8, p. 339–344, 2017. 
[92] B. Laarabi, O. May Tzuc, D. Dahlioui, A. Bassam, M. Flota-Bañuelos and A. Barhdadi, “Artificial neural 
network modeling and sensitivity analysis for soiling effects on photovoltaic panels in Morocco,” 
Superlattices and Microstructures, vol. 127, p. 139–150, 2019. 
[93] S. Shapsough, R. Dhaouadi and I. Zualkernan, “Using Linear Regression and Back Propagation Neural 
Networks to Predict Performance of Soiled PV Modules,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 155, p. 463–
470, 2019. 
[94] L. Micheli, M. G. Deceglie and M. Muller, “Mapping Photovoltaic Soiling Using Spatial Interpolation 
Techniques,” IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 272–277, 2019. 
[95] S. Pelland, P. Pawar, A. Veeramani, W. Gustafson and L. L. A. Etringer, “Testing Global Models of 
Photovoltaic Soiling Ratios Against Field Test Data Worldwide,” in 2018 IEEE 7th World Conference on 
Photovoltaic Energy Conversion (WCPEC) (A Joint Conference of 45th IEEE PVSC, 28th PVSEC & 34th 
EU PVSEC), Waikoloa Village, HI, USA, IEEE, 2018, p. 3442–3446. 
[96] L. Zhou, D. B. Schwede, K. W. Appel, M. J. Mangiante, D. C. Wong, S. L. Napelenok, P.-Y. Whung and B. 
Zhang, “The impact of air pollutant deposition on solar energy system efficiency: An approach to estimate 
PV soiling effects with the Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) model,” Science of the Total 
Environment, vol. 651, p. 456–465, 2019. 
[97] R. E. Pawluk, Y. Chen and Y. She, “Photovoltaic electricity generation loss due to snow – A literature 
review on influence factors, estimation, and mitigation,” Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 
107, p. 171–182, 2019. 
[98] Government of Canada, "Engineering Climate Datasets", Natural Resources Canada, 2019. 
[99] B. Marion, R. Schaefer, H. Caine and G. Sanchez, “Measured and modeled photovoltaic system energy 
losses from snow for Colorado and Wisconsin locations,” Solar Energy, vol. 97, p. 112–121, 2013. 
[100] T. Townsend and L. Powers, “Photovoltaics and snow: An update from two winters of measurements in the 
SIERRA,” in 2011 37th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, Seattle, WA, USA, IEEE, 2011, p. 
3231–3236. 
[101] S. A. Krajewski and B. L. Gibbs, Understanding Contouring: A Practical Guide to Spatial Estimation Using 
a Computer and Basics of Using Variograms, Colorado: Gibbs Associates, 2014. 

<<<PAGE 124>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
124 
[102] C. Baldus-Jeursen, “Analysis of Fort Simpson Airport Photovoltaic System Performance from January 1, 
2015 to December 31, 2018,” Varennes, 2018. 
[103] M. Mani and R. Pillai, “Impact of dust on solar photovoltaic (PV) performance: Research status, challenges 
and recommendations,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 14, no. 9, p. 3124–3131, 2010. 
[104] National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Sandia National Laboratory, SunSpec Alliance and SunShot 
National Laboratory Multiyear Partnership (SuNLaMP) PV O&M, “Best Practices for Operation and 
Maintenance of Photovoltaic and Energy Storage Systems; 3rd Edition,” 2018. 
[105] L. Cristaldi, M. Faifer, M. Rossi, M. Catelani, L. Ciani, E. Dovere and S. Jerace, “Economical evaluation of 
PV system losses due to the dust and pollution,” IEEE Instrumentation and Measurement Technology 
Conference, IEEE, 2012, p. 614–618. 
[106] J. Tanesab, D. Parlevliet, J. Whale and T. Urmee, “Energy and economic losses caused by dust on 
residential photovoltaic (PV) systems deployed in different climate areas,” Renewable Energy, vol. 120, p. 
401–412, 2018. 
[107] F. A. Mejia and J. Kleissl, “Soiling losses for solar photovoltaic systems in California,” Solar Energy, vol. 
95, p. 357–363, 2013. 
[108] W. Herrmann, Energy yield of PV power plants – Approaches for the determination of yield losses due to 
dust soiling in desert climates, InDust Workshop 16 May 2019, Intersolar Europe, Munich, Germany, 2019. 
[109] M. G. Deceglie, L. Micheli and M. Muller, “Quantifying Year-to-Year Variations in Solar Panel Soiling from 
PV Energy-Production Data,” in 2017 IEEE 44th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC), Washington 
D.C., USA, IEEE, 2017, p. 2804–2807. 
[110] Faifer M., Lazzaroni M., Toscani S., “Dust effects on the PV plant efficiency: A new monitoring strategy,” in 
20th IMEKO TC4 International Symposium and 18th International Workshop on ADC Modelling and 
Testing, Benevento, Italy, 2014. 
[111] S. C. Costa, A. S. A. Diniz and L. L. Kazmerski, “Solar energy dust and soiling R&D progress: Literature 
review update for 2016,” Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 82, p. 2504–2536, 2018. 
[112] H. Haeberlin and J. D. Graf, “Gradual Reduction of PV Generator Yield due to Pollution,” in 1998 2nd 
World Conference on Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conversion, Vienna, Austria, 1998, pp. 2764-2767. 
[113] A. AlDowsari, R. Bkayrat, H. AlZain and T. Shahin, “Best practices for mitigating soiling risk on PV power 
plants,” Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, IEEE, 2014, p. 1–6. 
[114] W. Glaubitt and P. Löbmann, “Anti-soiling effect of porous SiO2 coatings prepared by sol–gel processing,” 
Journal of Sol-Gel Science and Technology, vol. 59, no. 2, p. 239–244, 2011. 
[115] A. Einhorn, L. Micheli, D. C. Miller, L. J. Simpson, H. R. Moutinho, B. To, C. L. Lanaghan, M. T. Muller, S. 
Toth, J. J. John, S. Warade, A. Kottantharayil and C. Engtrakul, “Evaluation of Soiling and Potential 
Mitigation Approaches on Photovoltaic Glass,” IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 233–239, 
2019. 
[116] M. A. M. L. Jesus, G. Timò, C. Agustín-Sáenz, I. Braceras, M. Cornelli and A. d. M. Ferreira, “Anti-soiling 
coatings for solar cell cover glass: Climate and surface properties influence,” Solar Energy Materials and 
Solar Cells, vol. 185, p. 517–523, 2018. 

<<<PAGE 125>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
125 
[117] M. A. Bahattab, I. A. Alhomoudi, M. I. Alhussaini, M. Mirza, J. Hegmann, W. Glaubitt and P. Löbmann, 
“Anti-soiling surfaces for PV applications prepared by sol-gel processing: Comparison of laboratory testing 
and outdoor exposure,” Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, vol. 157, p. 422–428, 2016. 
[118] K. Ilse, M. Z. Khan, N. Voicu, V. Naumann, C. Hagendorf and J. Bagdahn, “Advanced performance testing 
of anti-soiling coatings – Part I: Sequential laboratory test methodology covering the physics of natural 
soiling processes,” Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, vol. 202, p. 110048, 2019. 
[119] K. Ilse, M. Z. Khan, N. Voicu, V. Naumann, C. Hagendorf and J. Bagdahn, “Advanced performance testing 
of anti-soiling coatings - Part II: Particle-size dependent analysis for physical understanding of dust 
removal processes and determination of adhesion forces,” Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, vol. 
202, p. 110049, 2019. 
[120] T. Lorenz, E. Klimm and K.-A. Weiss, “Soiling and Anti-soiling Coatings on Surfaces of Solar Thermal 
Systems – Featuring an Economic Feasibility Analysis,” Energy Procedia, vol. 48, p. 749–756, 2014. 
[121] S. Mondal, A. K. Mondal, A. Sharma, V. Devalla, S. Rana, S. Kumar and J. K. Pandey, “An overview of 
cleaning and prevention processes for enhancing efficiency of solar photovoltaic panels,” CURRENT 
SCIENCE, vol. 115, no. 6, p. 13, 2018. 
[122] G. C. Oehler, F. Lisco, F. Bukhari, S. Uličná, B. Strauss, K. L. Barth and J. M. Walls, “Testing the Durability 
of Anti-Soiling Coatings for Solar Cover Glass by Outdoor Exposure in Denmark,” Energies, vol. 13, no. 2, 
p. 299, 2020. 
[123] H. K. Elminir, A. E. Ghitas, R. H. Hamid, F. El-Hussainy, M. M. Beheary and K. M. Abdel-Moneim, “Effect 
of dust on the transparent cover of solar collectors,” Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 47, no. 18-
19, p. 3192–3203, 2006. 
[124] S. Bhaduri and A. Kottantharayil, “Mitigation of Soiling by Vertical Mounting of Bifacial Modules,” IEEE 
Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 240–244, 2019. 
[125] S. Bhaduri, S. Chattopadhyay, S. Zachariah, C. S. Solanki and A. Kottantharayil, “Evaluation of Increase in 
the Energy Yield of PV Modules by Inverting the Panels during the Non-Sunshine Hours,” in 26th 
International Photovoltaic Science and Engineering Conference, Singapore, 2016. 
[126] S. Warade and A. Kottantharayil, “Analysis of Soiling Losses for Different Cleaning Cycles,” in 2018 IEEE 
7th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion (WCPEC) (A Joint Conference of 45th IEEE 
PVSC, 28th PVSEC & 34th EU PVSEC), Waikoloa Village, HI, USA, IEEE, 2018, p. 3644–3647. 
[127] J. J. John, Characterization of Soiling Loss on Photovoltaic Modules, and Development of a Novel 
Cleaning System, Bombay, India: Indian Institute of Technology, 2015. 
[128] J. Kurz, “PV Cleaning: Choosing the Optimal Method and Frequency,” Solar Power Europe Webinar , p. 
25, October 18, 2017. 
[129] M. T. Grando, E. R. Maletz, D. Martins, H. Simas and R. Simoni, “Robots for Cleaning Photovoltaic Panels: 
State of the Art and Future Prospects,” in Actas de las IX Jornadas Argentinas de Robótica, Córdoba, 
Argentina, 2017. 
[130] S. Masuda, K. Fujibayashi, K. Ishida and H. Inaba, “Confinement and transportation of charged aerosol 
clouds via electric curtain,” Electronic Engineering in Japan, pp. 92:9-18, 1972. 
[131] A. Faes, D. Petri, J. Champliaud, J. Geissbühler, N. Badel, J. Levrat, B. Roustom, A. Hessler‐Wyser, N. 
Wyrsch, C. Ballif, G. Getaz, G. McKarris and M. Despeisse, “Field test and electrode optimization of 

<<<PAGE 126>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
126 
electrodynamic cleaning systems for solar panels,” Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 
vol. 27, no. 11, p. 1020–1033, 2019. 
[132] S. P. Hersey, R. M. Garland, E. Crosbie, T. Shingler, A. Sorooshian, S. Piketh and R. Burger, “An overview 
of regional and local characteristics of aerosols in South Africa using satellite, ground, and modeling data,” 
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, vol. 15, p. 4259–4278, 2015. 
[133] N. Ferretti, White Paper PV Module Cleaning, Market Overview and Basics, PI Berlin, 2018. 
[134] European Parliament and the Council of the European Union, EC/2006/42, Essential health and safety 
requirements relating to the design and construction of machinery, 2006. 
[135] EN 1096-5:2016-06, "Glass in building - Coated glass - Part 5: Test method and classification for the self-
cleaning performances of coated glass surfaces", 2016. 
[136] ECE R45, Supplement 4.2, "Uniform provisions concerning the approval of headlamp cleaners and of 
power driven vehicles with regard to headlamp cleaners (Test Dirt: Quartz-Coal Mixture)". 
[137] ISO 12103-1, "Road vehicles — Test contaminants for filter evaluation — Part 1: Arizona test dust", 2016. 
[138] DIN EN ISO 20566, 2013-06, "Paints and varnishes -- Determination of the scratch resistance of a coating 
system using a laboratory-scale car-wash", 2013. 
[139] IEC 62788-7-3 ED1, "Measurement procedures for materials used in photovoltaic modules - Part 7-3: 
Environmental exposures - Accelerated abrasion tests of PV module external surfaces (test of small glass 
samples)", Geneva, Switzerland: International Electrical Commission. 
[140] ASTM D2486-17:2017, "Standard test methods for scrub resistance of wall paints", 2017. 
[141] DIN 53778-2, "Emulsion paints for interior use: evaluation of cleanability and of wash and scrub resistance 
of coatings, 1983-08", 1983. 
[142] K. Ilse, Cleaning resistance of glass coatings, Test report V403/2018 www.fsolar.de, Fraunhofer CSP, 
2018. 
[143] N. Ferretti, A. Sönmez, F. Schneider, B. Litzenburger, S. Janke, T. Weber, J. Berghold and P. Grunow, 
“Reflectance Measurements for Testing the Effect of Module Cleaning on the Glass Surface,” 2015 31st 
European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition (EU-PVSEC), pp. 2538 - 2544, 2015. 
[144] N. Ferretti, K. Ilse, A. Sönmez, C. Hagendorf and J. Berghold, “Investigation on the Impact of Module 
Cleaning on the Antireflection Coating,” 32nd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and 
Exhibition, 2016. 
[145] EN 1096-5:2012, "Glass in building - Coated glass - Part 2: Requirements and test methods for class A, B 
and S coatings. Annex E: Abrasion resistance test", 2012. 
[146] N. Ferretti, A. El-Issa and L. Podlowski, “Standardized Test Procedure for PV Module Cleaning 
Equipment,” in 2019 36th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition (EU-PVSEC), 
Marseille, France, 2019, pp. 805 - 809. 
[147] G. Mathiak, D. Grimm, L. Rimmelspacher, W. Herrmann, F. Reil, J. Althaus and A. Morlier, “PV Module 
and Solar Glass Trickling Sand Testing,” in 2018 35th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference 
and Exhibition, Brussels, Belgium, 2018, pp. 1092 - 1096. 

<<<PAGE 127>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
127 
[148] DIN spec 4867, (under development): "Reinigungsprüfverfahren für die Abrasionsbeständigkeit von 
Photovoltaik-Modulen - Cleaning test method for the abrasion resistance of photovoltaic modules.", 2022. 
[149] Amtec Kistler GmbH, Laboratory car wash for testing the scratch resistance of coatings, 
www.amteckistler.de, download 2020, 2020. 
[150] J. Tanesab, D. Parlevliet, J. Whale and T. Urmee, “Dust Effect and its Economic Analysis on PV Modules 
Deployed in a Temperate Climate Zone,” Energy Procedia, vol. 100, p. 65–68, 2016. 
[151] B. Stridh, “Economical Benefit of Cleaning of Soiling and Snow Evaluated for PV Plants at Three Locations 
in Europe,” 27th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, 2012. 
[152] N. Heidari, J. Gwamuri, T. Townsend and J. M. Pearce, “Impact of Snow and Ground Interference on 
Photovoltaic Electric System Performance,” IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 5, no. 6, p. 1680–1685, 
2015. 
[153] R. W. Andrews, A. Pollard and J. M. Pearce, “The effects of snowfall on solar photovoltaic performance,” 
Solar Energy, vol. 92, p. 84–97, 2013. 
[154] G. Becker, B. Schiebelsberger, W. Weber, J. Schumacher, M. Zehner, G. Wotruba and C. Vodermayer, 
“Energy Yields of PV Systems - Comparison of Simulation and Reality,” 23rd European Photovoltaic Solar 
Energy Conference and Exhibition, 1-5 September 2008, Valencia, Spain, 2008. 
[155] T. Sugiura, T. Yamada, H. Nakamura, M. Umeya, K. Sakuta and K. Kurokawa, “Measurements, analyses 
and evaluation of residential PV systems by Japanese monitoring program,” Solar Energy Materials and 
Solar Cells, vol. 75, no. 3-4, p. 767–779, 2003. 
[156] M. Child and C. Breyer, “Vision and initial feasibility analysis of a recarbonised Finnish energy system for 
2050,” Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 66, p. 517–536, 2016. 
[157] E. Bellini, “Russian Far East sees 75MW of large scale solar come online,” PV Magazine, 2019, Nov.1 . 
[158] D. Dissing, “Radiation climatology of Alaska,” University of Alaska Fairbanks. 
[159] L. Burnham, Performance of Bifacial Modules on a Dual-Axis Tracker in a High-Albedo Environment, 
https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/1641282 last accessed Dec 2022, 2019, p. 8. 
[160] J. L. Braid, D. Riley, J. M. Pearce and L. Burnham, “Image Analysis Method for Quantifying Snow Losses 
on PV Systems,” in 2020 47th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), Virtual Meeting, IEEE, 
2020, p. 1510–1516. 
[161] E. Lorenz, D. Heinemann and C. Kurz, “Local and regional photovoltaic power prediction for large scale 
grid integration: Assessment of a new algorithm for snow detection,” Progress in Photovoltaics: Research 
and Applications, vol. 20, no. 6, p. 760–769, 2012. 
[162] A. P. Dobos, PV Watts Version 5 Manual. NREL/TP-6A20-62641, 2014. 
[163] D. F. J. Ryberg, Integration, Validation, and Application of a PV Snow Coverage Model in SAM. Report 
number: NREL/TP-6A20-64260., September 2015. 
[164] A. Granlund, J. Narvesjö and A. M. Petersson, “The Influence of Module Tilt on Snow Shadowing of 
Frameless Bifacial Modules,” in 2019 36th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, 
Marseille, France, 2019, pp. 1646 - 1650. 

<<<PAGE 128>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
 
128 
[165] B. Hashemi, A.-M. Cretu and S. Taheri, “Snow Loss Prediction for Photovoltaic Farms Using 
Computational Intelligence Techniques,” IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 10, no. 4, p. 1044–1052, 2020. 
[166] S. Hosseini, S. Taheri, M. Farzaneh and H. Taheri, “Modeling of Snow-Covered Photovoltaic Modules,” 
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 65, no. 10, p. 7975–7983, 2018. 
[167] X. Liu, S. J. Rees and J. D. Spitler, “Modeling snow melting on heated pavement surfaces. Part I: Model 
development,” Applied Thermal Engineering, vol. 27, no. 5-6, p. 1115–1124, 2007. 
[168] S. L. Hockersmith, Experimental and Computational Investigation of Snow Melting on heated horizontal 
Surfaces, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA, 2002. 
[169] A. Rahmatmand, S. J. Harrison and P. H. Oosthuizen, “Numerical and experimental study of an improved 
method for prediction of snow melting and snow sliding from photovoltaic panels,” Applied Thermal 
Engineering, vol. 158, p. 113773, 2019. 
[170] D. Riley, L. Burnham, B. Walker and J. M. Pearce, “Differences in Snow Shedding in Photovoltaic Systems 
with Framed and Frameless Modules,” in 2019 IEEE 46th Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), 
Chicago, IL, USA, IEEE, 2019, p. 0558–0561. 
[171] J. Bogenrieder, C. Camus, M. Hüttner, P. Offermann, J. Hauch and C. J. Brabec, “Technology-dependent 
analysis of the snow melting and sliding behavior on photovoltaic modules,” Journal of Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy, vol. 10, no. 2, p. 021005, 2018. 
[172] G. Mathiak, J. Sommer, W. Herrmann, N. Bogdanski, J. Althaus and F. Reil, “PV Module Damages 
Caused by Hail Impact and Non-Uniform Snow Load,” in 2016 32nd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy 
Conference and Exhibition, Munich, Germany, 2016, pp. 1692 - 1696. 
[173] E. J. Schneller, H. Seigneur, J. Lincoln and A. M. Gabor, “The Impact of Cold Temperature Exposure in 
Mechanical Durability Testing of PV Modules,” in 2019 IEEE 46th Photovoltaic Specialists Conference 
(PVSC), Chicago, IL, USA, IEEE, 2019, p. 1521–1524. 
[174] C. Pike, E. Whitney, M. Wilber and J. S. Stein, “Field Performance of South-Facing and East-West Facing 
Bifacial Modules in the Arctic,” Energies, vol. 14, no. 4, p. 1210, 2021. 
[175] A. M. Gabor, R. Janoch, A. Anselmo, J. Lincoln, E. J. Schneller, H. Seigneur, D. J. Harwood and M. W. 
Rowell, “Mounting Rail Spacers for Improved Solar Panel Durability,” in 2019 IEEE 46th Photovoltaic 
Specialists Conference (PVSC), Chicago, IL, USA, IEEE, 2019, p. 0131–0135. 
[176] J. S. Malmsten, “Solceller på tak” - “Solar cells on the roof”, BELOK large commercial building in 
cooperation with Swedish Energy Agency, 2015 Dec.. 
 
 

<<<PAGE 129>>>
Task 13 Performance, Operation and Reliability of Photovoltaic Systems – Soiling Losses – Impact on the Performance of Photovoltaic Power Plants 
129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
